# Introduction - Session #1 - Nonviolent Communication Training - Marshall Rosenberg

> In this session, I'll be giving you an introduction to how I came about the
> process. I'll be talking about, sharing its purpose, and give you an outline
> of it. The process I call Nonviolent Communication.

> Nonviolent communication consists of a value system that we are trying to live
> by. Then it outlines a language, thinking, communication skills, and means of
> influence that support that way of living.

[![](http://i.imgur.com/ehy0DcE.png)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GZnXBnz2kwk&list=PLPNVcESwoWu4lI9C3bhkYIWB8-dphbzJ3&index=1)\
[Introduction Nonviolent Communication - Training Course - Marshall Rosenberg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GZnXBnz2kwk&list=PLPNVcESwoWu4lI9C3bhkYIWB8-dphbzJ3&index=1)

Buy this course at
[Soundstrue.com](https://nonviolent-communication-sfm.soundstrue.com/)!!!

## Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Origin](#origin)
- [Process](#process)
- [Avoid criticism blame insults or demands](#avoid-criticism-blame-insults-or-demands)
- [Subsequent Sessions](#subsequent-sessions)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)
- [Resources](#resources)

## Introduction

Hello, my name is Marshall Rosenberg,

I'm very glad to have this opportunity to share with you some skills and some
consciousness that have been extraordinarily helpful to me in my life. I'm
pleased to say that thousands of people around the world that I've shared it
with find it helpful to them, so I'm glad to share it with you, through this
program.

In this session, I'll be giving you an introduction to how I came about the
process I'll be talking about, sharing its purpose, and give you an outline of
the process I call Nonviolent Communication.

I don't like that title. But why do I use it? I use it because, over the years,
it connects me with the people around the world that find our training very
valuable in their lives, and in their political activities. I have used it
because it connects me with those people. Why I don't like the title. One of the
reasons is the same reason that
[Gandhi didn't like the word nonviolent](http://www.gandhiashramsevagram.org/gandhi-relevance/chapter-3-theory-of-nonviolence.php).
It says what something isn't, but Nonviolent Communication is all focused on
what we do want, not just what we don't want.

Also, communication is only a small part of what I'll be sharing with you.
**Nonviolent communication consists of a value system that we are trying to live
by. Then it outlines a language, thinking, communication skills, and means of
influence that support that way of living.**

## Origin

#### What I'd like to do now is Give you an idea of how this process evolved

\[2:02\] I would trace its onset to my family moving to Detroit in 1943. Just in
time for the [race riots](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1943_Detroit_race_riot),
my family moved into the center of where these race riots took place. This was
quite an experience for me, as a young boy. It was an experience to sit in the
house, locked in for four days, not able to go out because of the violence in
the streets, to find out later that 30 people were killed in our neighborhood in
just about a week.

This stayed with me, that this is a world where people might want to hurt you
because of your skin color. When I went to school for the first time in Detroit,
Michigan, I learned something else that was rather frightening to me as a young
boy. I learned that my last name could be a stimulus for violence.

First day I was in class when the teacher read off the role and said Marshall
Rosenberg and I raised my hand. Two boys in front of me spun around and one of
them said, Are you a kike? I had never heard that word until then. I said, What?
He said, Are you a Jew? I said, Yes. He and his friend were waiting for me after
I left school that day waiting to beat me. So this was another lesson that not
only is this a world where people might want to harm you because of your skin
color, but some people hearing my name wanted to hurt me. **This instilled in me
questions about why is this? Why do people want to hurt one another, simply
because of their name, simply because of their skin color.**

\[3:58\] **At the same time, I had another powerful learning experience.** Quite
a different one, then, to seeing the violence that was going on in the streets.
I saw that violence isn't what we human beings are really about. I was fortunate
enough to see people exercising compassion under difficult conditions. For
example, my grandmother, with whom we lived, was paralyzed. My mother was taking
care of her. Each night, one of my uncle's would come to help my mother, and
take care of my grandmother. I couldn't wait for him to get there.

I would watch as he took care of my grandmother, as he cleaned her up, and gave
her various medical treatments that she needed. What struck me is, the whole
time he was doing this, the beautiful smile on his face. Even though to me as a
boy it seemed that the work he was doing was not easy. It was difficult to clean
up somebody, give them medications, the whole time he was doing it he had such a
beautiful smile on his face. **I saw this aspect of human beings, human beings
who could enjoy contributing to other people's well being.**

#### Two questions were in me, from this time on, and to this day

\[5:39\] These two questions:

- **what happens to people to lead them to enjoy other people's suffering, and
    to make them want to contribute to other people's suffering?**

- **What happens to us human beings so that we stay with the process of
    compassion where we enjoy contributing to each other well being?**

I wanted to learn about that. I wanted to learn what contributes to violence, so
I could do whatever I could to transform it, to prevent it. *I wanted to learn
about what helps human beings to stay connected, to what I believe is our
nature, our compassionate nature.* I wanted to do whatever I could to live that
way myself and to distribute what I learned to others.

When it came time to decide what I wanted to do in this world, I decided that I
would study psychology. Why did I pick that? I thought that subject would help
me with those two questions of what contributes to people being violent and what
kind of learning helps people to stay connected to their compassionate nature.

I went to the University with the idea of becoming a clinical psychologist. My
thinking was that people who are acting violent must have some kind of mental
dysfunction, some kind of illness. So I would learn how to cure this illness. In
the course of getting my doctor's degree in psychology, I had the good
experience with a professor of mine, Professor
[Michael Hakeem](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=Michael+Hakeem). He helped
me to see that the choice I had made clinical psychology had some limits to it.

First of all, he showed me that the way that psychologists and psychiatrists
diagnose people, didn't have any scientific research to document that these
words they use could be
[scientifically diagnosed](https://www.technologynetworks.com/neuroscience/news/psychiatric-diagnoses-found-to-be-scientifically-meaningless-321555).
He also showed me that by **looking at the problem 'why are people violent' as
an illness that it overlooks how the structures of our society contribute to
people behaving in this way**. He helped me to see that by diagnosing people as
mentally ill and believing that the violence was a cause of mental illness. We
were then taking the focus away from the education that the structures provided,
which create the violence.

I learned that after I had already gone just about to the point of graduation
with a doctor's degree. It was quite upsetting having spent about eight years at
the university, learning this profession and then just as I was about to
graduate, finding out from this professor the limitations of that. When I
graduated, I decided to go into private practice, and try to help people
transform their violence.

**I found that the tools that I had learned to do this with the tools of
psychoanalytic therapy, and other psychological trainings, which were in current
at the time, the first thing I found it didn't work very well**. In a sense that
it took a long time, and I didn't really see any major transformations
occurring. The people, yes, they seem to like coming in and have somebody listen
to them. But I wasn't really seeing any major changes occurring in their lives.

So I decided to start off with a couple of questions different than I had been
encouraged to ask myself in the course of my training in psychology, instead of
diagnosing what it was in people that's wrong with them, that makes them bad,
and trying to cure that. **I decided to start with a different question.**

#### How were we meant to live?

\[10:12\] Where do you find out this information? Well, for about a year, I
studied comparative religions, believing that these religions were each trying
to define this question How were we meant to live and to let us know this? So
through readings and taking some courses, **I came to a conclusion after reading
about comparative religions that they all were saying pretty much the same
thing, that compassion is how we were meant to live.**

Contributing to one another's well being willingly, out of the joy that comes
naturally, when we exercise our power in the service of contributing to people's
well being. They each said this, perhaps in a different way. But I got this same
message that our nature as human beings, is to exercise our enormous power in
the service of life, to enrich life in ourselves and others.

Realizing this and seeing that this was the core message and all of the
religions that I studied, **an obvious question came to me if we seem to all
agree on this subject, compassionate giving is what we human beings are meant to
be, I wondered why we're not doing it.** then I started to ask myself the
question

#### What skills are necessary to live compassionately?

\[11:54\] Then I saw that the skills that seemed necessary to live
compassionately we're quite different than the skills that we were taught. Then
when I asked myself, why is that? Then the professor that I mentioned, his words
came to me that we were educated, to contribute to the structures we were
living, and then these **structures in which people claim to be superiors and
know what's right for others, and to impose what they believe is right on the
others, that way of living requires a certain way of thinking, communicating and
using power.** I saw that that was the problem, that what created violence was a
certain way of thinking, a certain language and certain way of using power.

Then I asked myself,

- *what are the skills that are necessary to live in harmony with compassionate
    giving?*
    - What kind of language is necessary?
    - What kind of communication skills are necessary?
    - What kind of thinking supports it?
    - what kinds of means of influence support it?
    - and where do you find that information?

It wasn't too clear as I was reading about the comparative religions, how
specifically we were meant to behave in order to live in harmony with
compassionate giving. So I decided to a different kind of research to observe
the people that I respected the most, who seemed the most compassionate, who
seemed to enjoy giving to others. I tried to see how were they different than
the people who seemed to enjoy criticizing, blaming, and attacking others. It
was through studying these people, also studying some research in psychology,
that tried to identify what characteristics of development contribute to
people's behaving in a compassionate way.

**I put together from these sources, a process that seemed to me to summarize
how we were meant to live and the skills that were necessary to do this.**
that's how Nonviolent Communication evolved from the research that I did, to
identify what kind of human development is necessary for us to live
compassionately.

The process that I call Nonviolent Communication consists of:

#### An intention to contribute to our own well being, and the well being of

others, compassionately

\[14:57\] What I mean by giving compassionately is first of all, that whatever
we do is done willingly. It's not done out of guilt, or shame, or fear of
punishment, or trying to buy love by submitting to what we think others expect
us to do. **I saw that the intention I wanted to live by, that I thought was
necessary for compassionate giving, is that we give solely out of the joy that
comes naturally from contributing to life. Our own life and the lives of
others**. I organized what I was learning about this into the program that I now
call Nonviolent Communication.

At the time, I was in private practice of psychology.

> In my private practice, people were coming to me because of depression.
> Children were sent to me because they were having problems in school. Couples
> were coming to me because of marital problems. *I found that this process that
> I was putting together was much more effective as a healing tool for people
> than the way I had been taught to do psychotherapy at the university*.

\[16:27\] At first I was shocked by this because it was so different than how I
had been trained to analyze people and provide psychotherapy. It seemed too
simple to just show them how some different ways of behaving, different ways of
thinking, communicating, using power, how quickly this could correct problems
that were taking me months and not getting the same result. Then when I really
saw the power that the program had. I also saw that the way I was offering it to
people was not the way that I wanted to continue. By offering it in a private
practice as a psychologist, the people who were coming to me, were defining that
there was something wrong with them, something mentally ill about them for which
they needed healing. I was seeing more and more how that very concept of mental
illness was a destructive concept because it implied something was wrong with
people that needed fixing. That very concept, as I'll talk about in subsequent
sessions, I see gets in the way of people's evolution and human development.

\[17:50\] I wanted to offer what I was finding very valuable in some way other
than through private practice of psychology. How to do that I didn't have any
real idea at the time. But I started to talk to people, who found it helpful
when they had come to me, and ask for their support.

#### How could we get this out to people that might benefit by it

So people who had come to me and benefited by the process would invite others
that they thought would invite it. The next thing I knew, I was traveling around
the United States, because word spreads. People that I had helped in one
community to learn the process, and apply it in their lives would tell people
that they knew and other communities, and before I knew it, I was spending much
of my life traveling around the United States, to different groups of people who
are wanting me to share the process with them. In those days, many of the people
were concerned with racial relationships. They were seeing the cost of racism
and wanted to know how Nonviolent Communication could be supportive in, first of
all, helping people liberate themselves from the kind of thinking and cultural
learning that contributed to racism. I was working on that issue with people in
many states in the United States, particularly the southern states because, at
that time, the country was going through desegregation in the schools and many
problems were occurring. People were finding Nonviolent Communication very
helpful, both in transforming racist kinds of thinking into thinking which was
more respectful of differences and also helps reconcile warring groups within
communities on this subject.

\[20:07\] **When the word got around about how valuable Nonviolent Communication
was with dealing with racism, began to be invited to work with people who are
concerned about sexism.** Here again, found that the process was very helpful in
the work that the people were doing in that area.

One of the problems I faced was that working with the people in those areas,
racism and sexism, often did not have much money to offer me for providing the
help that I was giving them. When I was in private practice, I was getting a lot
of affluent people coming to me for my services, but just to go out and offer it
to people around that would invite me into their community, having heard about
it, the initial groups were not very affluent people.

To get around the United States, it was pretty costly for me to stop overnight
and be in a hotel. So **much of the time I had to sleep outdoors as I was
traveling from city to city**. This was no problem when the weather was good
because I had a pretty good sleeping bag, but of course it could be quite
uncomfortable in the wintertime, or when it rained. One day as I was driving
through Kansas, and I was about to stop cuz it was nighttime and I needed some
sleep and on my way back home. The problem was it was raining very hard. When it
did that, I would need to go into the nearby town and find some overhang on some
building that I could sleep under.

So, I went into a place in the nearest town that I could find with a little
overhang from the roof that I could be protected from the rain. I got my
sleeping bag out of the car and started to sleep. But now the police came by and
wonder who is this strange person who just chooses to get out and sleep
underneath that overhang. They seemed a little worried about me. They had me up
against my car with my hands on top and they were searching me and asking me why
I was there.

\[22:32\] I told that story to some friends of mine. A couple months later, they
were in a workshop with me and teasing me about that. They said, Marshall, have
you frightened the police with your sleeping habits, sleeping out under roof
tops? and the woman who attended this training, when she heard this, she asked
me martial law. Why do you sleep outdoors like that? I said, Well, you know many
of the people that invite me into their communities don't have much money.
Sleeping in a motel is pretty costly for me. I don't mind sleeping outdoors.
It's just that sometimes that rain is awkward. So that's when I go into town and
sleep under the overhangs.

The last day of the workshop, this woman came up to me and said to me, I have
something I want to offer you. She gave me a check for a good sum of money. I
was shocked. I said, What's this about? she said, it has some strings attached.
Oh, I said, What are they? She said, You're not to sleep outdoors anymore.
You're to use this money to sleep in hotels and be more comfortable.

I thanked her for her kindness, but I gave her back the check. She said, Why are
you giving this back to me? I said, Oh, if I was to have that much money, I
certainly wouldn't want to use it to make hotel owners more wealthy.

She said, Well, what would you do with it? I said I'd use it first to buy a car
I could sleep in. Second, I would use it to buy a computer because I'm finding
that these computers can help me make mailing lists and get a lot of the work I
need to do to spread the word around. It could make it a lot easier.

She gave me back the check and she said, Please and buy a car and buy a
computer. She said, but you know, **what would help if you had a not for profit
organization. I could deduct that**. So it would be very helpful to me if you
could do that. I said, Well, you know, some other people have been telling me
there'd be some advantages to my forming a not for profit organization.

*so I did,*

#### I formed a not for profit organization called the Center for Nonviolent

Communication

\[24:58\] Then I thought, how do you start an organization where it was getting
overwhelming for me to be doing all this by myself? So I sent out a letter to
people around the United States and Canada who had been finding my training
helpful. I invited them to come together if they would be interested in sharing
with me the challenge of how do we distribute Nonviolent Communication in a way
that it could be helpful to people most in the United States and Canada. I was
delighted to find that 23 people came together. They had this interest in
working with me on how we could as a team, make the training more available. But
then they were so effective in inviting me all over the United States and
Canada.

I was seeing day after day, how valuable the process could be, how many people
were using it and how many ways. **I saw that it was far too valuable to make it
dependent on my availability**.

Just at this time, I was reading of the work of
[Paulo Freire](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paulo_Freire). He was then the head
of the department of education in Brazil, at a very low rate of literacy. He
came up with a very creative program for increasing
[literacy in Brazil](https://www.brasilwire.com/paulo-freire-and-the-war-on-brasils-public-education/).
Instead of having to depend on well educated teachers to teach reading,
developed, very clever program and very simple in which **people who are
learning how to read could turn around and teach other people how to do it**.
Through this process, he rapidly spread literacy skills throughout Brazil. But
he did something else that was also very clever. He integrated into this
literacy teaching to get people to think more about how their government was
working and what power they had to change things that were not in harmony with
their values.

\[27:13\] Within a short time, he was getting about 85% of the people literate.
Whereas when he started out, it was about 3%. Well, this really stimulated me
and I thought, could **I make this process so clear that I could teach people
how to teach other people the process**. I started this experiment in three
cities that I was working in a lot of time, San Francisco, California, Toronto,
Canada, and Norfolk, Virginia. I found a team of citizens in each area that were
finding the process very helpful and shared with them how I offered it, and
showed them how they might teach it to others.

Before I knew it, these teams spread to other teams in the United States. Then a
woman in one of the cities in California, who was originally from Switzerland,
she thought that this process might be very helpful to the people in
Switzerland. She said, If I go over there and describe it to the people in my
town that I lived in, and some of the people are interested, would you be
willing to go there and offer the process?

She went, found people who were interested. I then went to Switzerland and
offered the process and when people in the United States heard that I was doing
that. Some people said, Well, we know people in Germany. How about while you're
over in Switzerland, offering it to people in Germany? I did. That started me
then in Europe. That was about 30 years ago.

**In the 30 years since our process has been spreading throughout the world, so
that now we have projects going in about 50 countries. We have a team of about
200 people who I've trained to offer our training to other people and in their
countries, they're training other people to train other people. So we're seeing
a very rapid distribution of this process of Nonviolent Communication**.

## Process

\[29:45\] **Now I have outlined the purpose of Nonviolent Communication:**

> to provide us with the language with the thinking, communication means of
> influence that support and connecting with ourselves and others in a way that
> promotes compassionate giving.

#### I'd like to clarify for you the structure of the process itself

*In subsequent sessions will be looking at these components in greater detail.
But for the moment, let me just give you an overview of what Nonviolent
Communication consists of to help support us in creating compassionate giving.*

\[30:33\] **First, it requires a radical transformation of language.**

[For about 10,000 years](https://www.theguardian.com/inequality/2017/dec/05/how-neolithic-farming-sowed-the-seeds-of-modern-inequality-10000-years-ago)
over most of our planet, people have been operating according to what I call
domination structures, structures in which some people claim to be superiors and
have the right to control others because they know what's best. Some of these
people call themselves kings. Some call themselves czars. But whatever they call
themselves, it's very important for their structures to sustain themselves, that
people be educated to be obedient to them. *So how do you educate people to be
submissive and obedient?*

Well, you need to teach them a language in which they get disconnected from
their own power and look outward to authority to guide how they are meant to
live. To do this requires a language that is static that describes what people
are, whether they are good or bad, right or wrong, normal or abnormal.

#### To maintain domination structures

- a core component is to educate people with such a static language that uses
    the verb to be in ways that judge people, their behavior, their appearance,
    their intelligence.

In addition to this language that I call a language of domination, it's also
important to teach people retributive justice.

- Retributive justice basically implies that if you are judged as bad by the
    authorities, you deserve to suffer for it to receive punishment. If you are
    positively judged by authorities is good, then you deserve to be reward.

> It's my belief that this combination of teaching people To think in a static
> way, in terms of good, bad, right wrong, normal, abnormal, appropriate,
> inappropriate, mentally normal mentally ill. That way of thinking combined
> with retributive justice based on punishment and reward, I believe is at the
> heart of violence on our planet.

\[33:24\] Nonviolent communication offers us a different language than a
language that implies whether people deserve to be punished or reward.
Nonviolent communication focuses our attention on human needs, whether human
needs are being fulfilled or not. When they're not, obviously what is called
for, is to find ways we can behave that nurture these needs. This is radically
different way of thinking.

Instead of judging right or wrong, to determine whether people are punished or
not, are rewarded or not Nonviolent Communication focuses on what is happening
to our needs.

- If our needs are not being fulfilled by what is happening, let us take action
    that fulfills our needs.
- If our needs are being fulfilled, let's celebrate.

This is a radical departure from the language of domination, a language of
judging what people are.

**Nonviolent communication shows us three other important forms of communication
that support expressing our needs and understanding the needs of other people.**

**First** Nonviolent Communication suggest clarity about actions that are
supporting needs being fulfilled or not.

Nonviolent communication suggest that we make clear observations that we can
tell people when their actions are meeting our needs, and when their actions are
not meeting our needs.

Another component of Nonviolent Communication are feelings, **feelings are
manifestations of what is happening to our needs**. When our needs are not being
fulfilled. We feel unpleasant feelings. When our needs are being met. We feel
pleasureful feelings

**A fourth component of Nonviolent Communication** are requests. When we see
that our needs are not being fulfilled, we need to request of ourselves or
others, what actions we would like taken to better meet our needs.

#### Four components makeup Nonviolent Communication

\[36:09\] The most basic, our **needs**, and then **observations** of what is
fulfilling our needs and what isn't. **Feelings** to identify the results of
what's happening to our needs now, whether they're being met or not. Our
feelings reveal that to us. A **request** what we would like done about our
needs that are not being fulfilled.

These four components are rather different than the language that I was taught.
I went to schools for 21 years. In those years of schooling, I was never asked,
for example, what my needs were, or what my feelings were. Very rarely was I
ever asked what my requests for. The schools I attended were basically schools
in which the teachers use the language of judgments. They told you whether what
you did was right or wrong, good or bad. In such an environment, we don't learn
a language of life. We learn a language that orients us to what authority wants
us to believe and do.

Nonviolent communication shows us both how to make these four components clear
to people.

##### These four components basically answer two questions

**What's alive in us?** When we say what is contributing to our well being, how
we feel and what our needs are that are behind our feelings, that answers the
question of what's alive in us at a given moment.

a second question that Nonviolent Communication directs itself to is **what
would make life more wonderful**? that's where our requests come in. We say what
we would like to make life more wonderful.

\[38:20\] So Nonviolent Communication involves sharing what's alive in us. What
would make life more wonderful? To receive the same information from other
people, to connect with what's alive in them, and what would make life more
wonderful for them. It has been my experience that when we connect at this
level, what's alive in each other and what would make life more wonderful for
each other, and we avoid the following, we can find ways of getting everyone's
needs fulfilled compassionately.

## Avoid criticism blame insults or demands

- First, we need to avoid any language that sounds like criticism or blame or
    insults.
- Next, we need to avoid presenting our request to others in which they hear as
    a demand.

I have found through my working with people over the years, that anytime people
hear criticism or demands, makes it very difficult for people to enjoy
contributing to one another's well being.

\[39:38\] **Nonviolent Communication suggests that we avoid at all times the
following strategies for trying to influence people to do what we are
requesting.** We want people to know that we never want anything done that we
request out of guilt or shame created by criticism they hear coming from us.

I believe that anytime we influence people, like criticism, blame insults, even
if they do what we request, it will be very costly to us. Because then they're
not giving compassionately from the heart. They're giving to avoid shame or
guilt. Giving done out of that energy, I believe is costly to both parties in
any relationship.

## Avoiding Punishment + Reward

**Nonviolent communication also suggests that we avoid at all times any use of
punishment.**

Now that shocks many people around the world that I work with, they have the
idea that without punishment, you have anarchy. You'll have violence, you'll
have all kinds of horrible things happen. They believe that the only way you can
have order is through a justice system in which people punished if they don't do
what the authorities think is right.

In subsequent sessions, I will show how we can resolve conflicts without any
kind of punishment. But that's not easy for many people to feel comfortable
with, that I work with, because they have been in schools, families,
governments, are all set up on the basis of retributive justice, the idea that
there are certain things you must do and if you don't do them, and you deserve
to suffer for what you have done, and if you do these things, which are defined
as right by authorities, then you deserve to be rewarded.

\[41:44\] When I suggest other alternatives to conflict resolution, then
punishment and reward. It's enormously shocking to people. One of the things
that helps is, I say to people,

#### If you ask yourself two questions, you will see that punishment and reward never work

what are these two important questions?

- Question number one, if somebody is doing something you don't like, what would
    you like them to do differently?

Now, if you answer only that question, it can lead you to think that punishment
sometimes works. Because certainly we can all think of evidence, I would guess,
of a time when maybe we were influenced to do something out of fear of
punishment, or we were able to influence our children to do things that because
they were afraid they'd be punished if they didn't. So if you define works as
simply getting people to do what you want, punishment sometimes works.

If you ask a second question of yourself, I believe you will see that punishment
never works.

- What do you want the other person's reasons to be for doing what you request
    of them?

\[43:10\] When people ask the second question, what do you want other people's
reasons to be for doing what you want them to do? They soon see that anytime we
get people to do things out of fear that we're going to punish them if they
don't, or out of shame or guilt. It's very obvious then that whatever we got
that person to do is costly. Because we are then experienced as a source of
violence. Somebody who is prepared to make them suffer if they don't do what we
want.

\[43:49\] it's pretty obvious to everybody that that is very costly because **to
whatever degree people see us as violent rather than compassionate it that much
harder for them to enjoy compassionately relating to us**.

Now people wonder why I put rewards into this same category of something that if
you ask, what do you want people's reasons to be that you won't use it? They
say, well aren't rewards nice? Doesn't it make people want to do things? I say
it may motivate people to do things. But that's not getting people motivated to
do things out of compassion, out of enjoyment that comes naturally from
contributing to people's well being. Rewards get people to do things out of a
whole different energy, not out of a desire to enrich life, but out of a desire
to gain something that they want to gain. I like very much Alfie Kohn's book
[punished by rewards](https://www.alfiekohn.org/article/punished-rewards-article/)
for clarifying how we rewards are equally violent as punishment, or Nonviolent
communication then suggest that we not only avoid criticism, rewards punishment.

#### It also suggests the danger of a language that denies choice

\[45:25\] I often refer to this language that denies choice by using the German
word [Amtssprache](https://en.nvcwiki.com/index.php/Amtssprache). I started to
use that phrase Amtssprache, having read about the Nazi war criminal
[Adolf Eichmann](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adolf_Eichmann).

**At his trial for war crimes in Jerusalem, Eichmann was asked was it difficult
for you to send thousands of people to their death?**

\[45:55\] Eichmann on answered very honestly, he said to tell you the truth. It
was easy. **Our language made it easy.** That answer shocked his interviewer and
his interviewer said what language and Eichman said, my fellow Nazi officers and
we came up with a name for describing the language of its we were taught in
schools to us and especially to us in our position as officers in the military.
We called this language Amtssprache up between us. Well, in German, *Amt* means
office and *sprache* means language. So what they were referring to then was a
language of bureaucracy.

Eichmann was asked for some examples of Amtssprache, and Eichmann said it's a
language in which you deny responsibility for your actions. If you don't feel
responsible for your actions, you don't feel so bad when you do things like send
people to their death. It was asked for some examples of this. Eichmann said,
Well, if somebody asked you why you do it, you say I had to, I had no choice.
**if people question that and say, Well, what do you mean you had no choice then
you say, superiors orders, company policy. It's the law.**

dangerous, dangerous language, a language that denies choice. Nonviolent
communication is designed to help us remain conscious of choice every moment to
believe that every action we take, we choose to take. We don't necessarily like
some actions that we take.

#### We don't do anything we don't choose to do

That bothers a lot of people when I say that in our trainings around the world.

\[47:58\] For example, a story that clarifies this occurred in city in the
United States where I was working with some parents and teachers. When **I
suggested that words like have to, should, ought, must, can't, are dangerous, as
I would define danger, because they turn out people who don't feel responsible
for their actions.** One of the mothers who attended this session got very
upset, and she said, but there are some things you have to do, that you have no
choice of. There are things I do every day that I hate to do, but there are some
things you have to do and it is our job as parents and teachers to see that our
children do what they have to do. I said to her, could you give me an example of
something you do that you believe now that you have no choice?

She thought for a moment and said, oh, there's so many things But okay, here's
one. When I go home this evening, I have to cook. I hate to cook, I hate it with
a passion. But I have done it every day for 20 years, even when I've been sick,
I do it. There just are some things you do. I told her I was very sad to hear
anybody do anything even one time out of that kind of thinking, thinking in
which you believe you have no choice. I told her that I was hoping that if I
made clear the value of Nonviolent Communication and she applied it, she would
see many more options open to her in her life. I'm pleased to say she was a very
rapid student and applied Nonviolent Communication very quickly in her life.
**She went home that very evening from the workshop and denounced her family
that she no longer wanted to cook.**

\[50:03\] I got some feedback from her family. The feedback happened three weeks
later, when I had another introductory session I was doing in town who shows up
but her older two sons, she had four sons. They came up to talk to me before the
session started. I said, I'm really glad you came up to visit me before the
session started. I'm very curious as to what's going on in your home. Your
mother has been calling me up about every other day, telling me about the major
changes she's been making in her life since the training. I'm always very
curious as to how other family members respond to this, when one family member
comes home speaking a rather different language.

I said, for example, that first night when she said that she no longer wanted to
cook, I'd like to know what reaction you had to that? the oldest son said to me,
Marshall, I just said to myself, thank God. I said, How did you come to that? He
said, I said to myself now maybe she won't complain at every meal. **That very
clearly communicated. What concerns me about any language that denies choice. It
leads us often to be slaves of authority when it is not to the well being of
people to be slaves of authority.**

\[51:40\] Nonviolent communication is a language that heightens our
consciousness that we have choice. Every moment of our lives, we have choice.
Nobody can make us do anything. My own children taught me that from the time
they were two years old. They taught me I couldn't make them do anything. If I
were to say, please put your toys back in the toy box. Now it's time for dinner.
They might say no. I would say, Don't you hear what daddy said, Please put your
toys back in the toy box. "No."

My children taught me I couldn't make them do anything. All I could do is make
them wish they had. If I would do that, they've taught me another lesson that if
I made them wish they had, they would make me wish I hadn't made them wish they
had. In other words, violence creates violence, punishment creates counter
violence.

## Subsequent Sessions

#### we will be looking at various applications of Nonviolent Communication in our lives

\[53:00\] **In session two**, I will be describing how Nonviolent Communication
helps us to stay conscious of how we choose to live and how we can liberate
ourselves from any cultural indoctrination that interferes with our living
moment by moment in harmony with values of our own choosing. In other words,
session will show us how to live the life within ourselves. That mirrors the
kind of world we want to live it. If we're not able to live within ourselves in
a way that we choose. It will be very difficult for us to contribute to creating
an outside world that is acting in harmony with our values.

\[53:52\] **In session three**, I will be describing how Nonviolent
Communication supports us to be honest with each other, without any criticism,
without any blame, without insulting. So how we can be honest, by revealing
what's alive in us, and what would make life more wonderful, but without ever
using any criticism, or demands.

\[54:22\] **In session four**, we'll be looking at how to empathically connect
with other people's messages. Now by empathic connection, be referring to how do
we see what's alive and other people? what would make their life more wonderful?
How do we connect with them in that way, regardless of how they communicate.
That's one of the things that people value very much about Nonviolent
Communication. It doesn't require the other person's cooperation for us to reach
this connection where everybody's needs can get met. Compassionate giving our
ability to hear what's alive and people and what would make life more wonderful
for them, regardless of how they communicate greatly opens up the possibilities
that we can resolve any conflict without violence.

\[55:19\] **In session five**, we'll be looking at how Nonviolent Communication
supports our ability to get our needs for love met in intimate relationships.

**In session six**, we'll be looking at how we experience authority and how we
exercise authority. How we do this by seeing people in authority as offers of
nurturing not as controllers and we *will see how this applies*:

- In our role as parents.
- Our role as teachers
- as managers, or in any role in which we are defined as some kind of authority.

\[56:07\] **In session seven**, I'll be showing how Nonviolent Communication can
contribute to healing, emotional healing. We'll see how each of us has the power
to contribute to each other's healing when we can engage in empathic connection
and honest expression. We'll also see in session seven, how Nonviolent
Communication can assist when we are mediating between other people's conflicts.
Either whether we've been invited to do that, or when we are present, and can
offer mediation skills without people even being aware that we're doing it.
We'll also see how Nonviolent Communication can support us in helping bring
about reconciliation between groups in pain with each other, whether these
groups are within the family business place, or different groups within warring
countries.

\[57:12\] **In session eight**, I'll be describing how Nonviolent Communication
can support us in our social change efforts. We need to not only know how to
influence individuals who are behaving in ways we don't like. We need to also
know how to do all of the transformation that's necessary for social change to
take place. That means that it's not just individuals that we need to know how
to transform. But groups of individuals, whether these groups call themselves
gangs, whether these groups call themselves Corporation, governments. We look in
that session on how Nonviolent Communication can support us in social change.

\[58:03\] **In session nine**, we will look at how to keep the energy and the
consciousness that Nonviolent Communication requires. We'll see the role of
celebration and gratitude and giving us the energy that it takes to sustain a
compassionate life. In a world that often makes it quite a challenge.

## Conclusion

#### People who have studied Nonviolent Communication with us usually have two things to say about it

**First, they say how simple it is.**

Because it basically focuses on these two questions that I described what's
alive in us? what would make life more wonderful? and to hear that same
information and others what's alive in them and what would make life more
wonderful for them. So people say how simple this is.

**At the same time they say how difficult it is.**

Now, how can something be so simple and so difficult? Well, it is simple.
Nonviolent communication is a more natural way of being. It simply says, Let's
stay connected to life, the life within us. Like any other form of life, whether
it be a tree or animals, life requires being connected enough to live to know
how to fulfill our needs. So in that sense, Nonviolent Communication is a very
simple process. But the second thing that people say about is how difficult it
can be. The reason that it's so difficult is that it requires liberating
ourselves from centuries of education that have buried what's alive in us behind
cultural education that is designed to make us nice Dead people, not
compassionate living people.

**I look forward in our subsequent sessions to seeing how we can connect with
Nonviolent Communication in a way that helps us to live our lives more fully.**

#### Buy this course at [Soundstrue.com](https://nonviolent-communication-sfm.soundstrue.com/)

## Resources

- [Psychiatric Diagnoses Found to Be "Scientifically Meaningless"](https://www.technologynetworks.com/neuroscience/news/psychiatric-diagnoses-found-to-be-scientifically-meaningless-321555)
- [Paulo Freire And The War On Brasil’s Public Education](https://www.brasilwire.com/paulo-freire-and-the-war-on-brasils-public-education/)
- [Punished by Rewards? A Conversation with Alfie Kohn](https://www.alfiekohn.org/article/punished-rewards-article/)
- [Amtssprache (Adolf Eichmann) - Sprache, die Wahlmöglichkeit leugnet -"Müssen" - Marshall Rosenberg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sk9-3bMAGBw)
