# How We Communicate with Ourselves - Session #2 - Nonviolent Communication Training - Marshall Rosenberg

**Working with anger, depression, self-judgement, and not giving away our power
to cultural programming**

> In this session, I would like to focus on how we apply Nonviolent
> Communication within ourselves.

[![](http://i.imgur.com/ehy0DcE.png)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bH9t1lAX2UQ&list=PLPNVcESwoWu4lI9C3bhkYIWB8-dphbzJ3&index=2)\
[Training Session # 2 Marshall Rosenberg CNVC org](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bH9t1lAX2UQ&list=PLPNVcESwoWu4lI9C3bhkYIWB8-dphbzJ3&index=2)

Buy this course at
[Soundstrue.com](https://nonviolent-communication-sfm.soundstrue.com/)!!!

## Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Working with Anger](#working-with-anger)
- [How to learn from our mistakes without losing self-respect](#how-to-learn-from-our-mistakes-without-losing-self-respect)
- [Depression and self-judgement](#depression-and-self-judgement)
- [Our feelings tell us what is happening to our needs](#our-feelings-tell-us-what-is-happening-to-our-needs)
- [Judging yourself for judging yourself](#judging-yourself-for-judging-yourself)
- [Training ourselves never to give our power away](#training-ourselves-never-to-give-our-power-away)
- [Resources](#resources)

## Introduction

Nonviolent communication requires quite a transformation from how many of us
have been programmed to communicate. Many of us have been programmed to
communicate in a language of categorizing people and their actions to judge what
they are, for doing what they're doing.

#### I was working in one culture in Malaysia, that had a radically different language than the one I was taught

My interpreter wanted to start the day by having a half hour with me. He said, I
need to explain to you some things about our language which may be different
than yours, that I'd like you to be aware of. Because if you're not aware of
this, it will make my job as an interpreter more difficult. We met for a half an
hour before the day started. He said, you know, Marshall, it's important to be
aware that in our language, we have no verb to be in the sense of judging what
people or their actions are. If you use any language today that judges people or
their actions in that way, it will be very hard for me to interpret. I thought
of this for a moment.

I thought to myself, how can I go through a day without insulting people? **My
brain had been programmed to think moment by moment in terms of what will people
think of me.**

Will they judge me right or wrong, good or bad, appropriate or inappropriate?
And I was taught to judge other people this way. The thought of a language that
didn't contain this, it kind of amazed me.

I said to the interpreter, *"how will you interpret today then if I should say
to somebody, you're selfish?"*

He said, Oh, Marshall, that would be a real challenge. Because as I tell you, we
don't think that way. I said, Well, how will you interpret that, then?

He said, If you say to somebody, you're selfish, here's how it would sound like
in our language, *I would say, Marshall sees you taking care of your needs, but
not the needs of others. He'd like you to take care of the needs of others as
well.*

When I heard that, I smiled. I said to myself, my goodness, that's pure
Nonviolent Communication. Well, then why was I there to teach them their native
language?

(2:48) Actually, I wasn't there to teach them Nonviolent Communication.
Nonviolent communication was their native language. Their one senator for 60,000
people asked me to work with his people, because logging interests were coming
into their habitat and destroying their environment, and his people didn't know
how to speak with people who worked for the logging interest, who spoke a
different language. So he was wanting me to show them how you communicate with
people who speak this different language.

### OJ Harvey - Relationship Between Language and Violence

[OJ Harvey at the University of Colorado](https://archive.org/stream/conceptualsystem00harv/conceptualsystem00harv_djvu.txt),
went around the world and took samples of literature from different cultures to
see how often this verb "to be" was used in judging people's actions good, bad,
right, wrong, etc. He correlated this with measures of violence - violence
toward oneself, violence toward others, and he finds a high correlation. The
more cultures think in terms of what people are and their actions, the more
violence in those cultures.

#### We have four friends that can help alert us that we are thinking in a way that contributes to violence

These four feelings are very helpful because when we feel these feelings, we can
use them as an alert, that we're thinking in a way that's contributing to
violence on the planet. Here is an opportunity for us to transform that
thinking.

(4:27) What are these four friends that we have?

**Anger** - **Depression** - **Guilt** - **Shame**

Whenever we're feeling those feelings, we are thinking in a way that we have
been taught to think for about 10,000 years. A way of thinking designed to make
us obedient to authority, but a way of thinking that is not conducive to safety
and peace on our planet. We can use those feelings as a wake up signal. Wake up,
we're thinking in a way that's not conducive to peace on the planet. Let's
transform the thinking into one that promotes peace on our planet.

*So let me show you what I mean.*

## Working with anger

(5:17) When we work with groups on the subject of anger, that's a good feeling
to teach us Nonviolent Communication, because **anger tells us that we are
disconnected from our needs**, the central part of Nonviolent Communication.

#### Anger tells us we're thinking in a way that creates violence on the planet

I was working on this subject with a group of prisoners. One of them was very
angry on this particular day. I asked him what the stimulus for his anger was.
What did somebody do that was triggering his anger? I could just tell he was so
angry.

He said, I made a request to the prison officials two weeks ago for some job
training. I still haven't heard from them.

I said, Yeah, that tells me what the stimulus was for your anger. Now, what's
the cause of your anger? He said, I just told you. I said, Oh, no, you remember
from our previous session? **I tried to make clear to you that it's never what
other people do that makes us angry. It's how we think that makes us angry.** So
what are you telling yourself that's making you angry?

He said, I don't know what you're talking about, people can make you angry. I
said, No, people can't make you angry. If you followed me around in my work,
you'd see this very clearly.

(6:44) For example, I'm working in several places around the world where there's
been a lot of violence such as Rwanda. I was working with a group of people all
of whom had had at least one member of their family killed. Some of them were so
angry that all they could live for was vengeance, and thinking of getting back
at the other people. **Some of the people who had had horrible things happen to
them were not angry. They weren't repressing the anger denying, but they were
not thinking in a way that creates the anger.** So not even something as
dramatic as having a member of one's family killed can make you angry.

So I said to this prisoner, so what are you telling yourself that does make you
angry? After a moment, he said, *I'm telling myself, it isn't fair. I need the
training that I requested. They're just ignoring me and treating me like I'm
nothing.* He went on to give several other statements of the judgments he had of
the prison officials for not having gotten back to him about his request for job
training. I said okay, Now you've answered my question of what causes your
anger.

(8:04)

#### Anger is caused by how you think, language that is disconnected from your needs, and makes violence enjoyable

As the Christian
[theologian Walter Wink](https://web.archive.org/web/20140104161930/http://walterwink.com/)
said, we've been educated for thousands of years to make violence enjoyable. All
you need to do to make violence enjoyable, is think there's bad guys, and that
these bad guys deserve to suffer for what they've done. It can make it enjoyable
for you to create pain for these people. **So anger is a very valuable feeling.
It tells us we are perpetuating the thinking that creates that kind of anger.**

With this prisoner, I showed him that it's valuable, when you are angry, to be
conscious that you're angry because of your own thinking, and not because of
what the other person did. The other person's action is a stimulus for your
anger, but not the cause. The cause is your thinking.

(9:20) Then I said, it's also very important, once you have identified the
thinking that causes your anger, it's important to be conscious, that, that
thinking is a tragic, suicidal expression of an unmet need. See, **anger tells
us, in other words, that a need of ours isn't getting met**. But our thinking
doesn't connect with that need. Our connection goes to judging the other person
who was the stimulus for the anger.

I said to this prisoner, go behind those judgments that you're making of the
prison officials, for not responding to your request for some job training.
What's the need behind all these judgments that they're not being fair, they're
treating you like you don't exist? **What's the need, that's behind all that
thinking?**

He thought for a moment and said, I need to develop myself, I need skills for
developing myself so I can earn a living when I get out of here. Otherwise, I'm
going to end up back in here very quickly. I said to him now, how are you
feeling at this moment that your attention is on those needs? And he said, I'm
scared, I'm scared.

#### You see, we cannot be angry when we're connected to life

What I mean by connected to life is to be connected to our needs or to the needs
of others.

(10:45) We can only be angry when we get disconnected from life, and go up to
our head, and think in a way we have been programmed to think, in terms of
wrongness of the other person. Now, I'm not saying there's anything wrong with
being angry. That would be unfortunate if I come across that way, because **a
lot of people have been educated to think that if you're a nice person, you
don't get angry. They've been taught to repress their anger. I'm certainly not
saying that. I'm saying the opposite.**

Anger is a friend of ours. It tells us we're thinking in a way that's
contributing to violence on the planet. We're a part of that violence, and
*anger wakes us up and gives us a chance to transform our thinking, to a kind of
thinking that creates peace on our planet*. I said to him, notice how
differently you feel when you're in touch with your needs. When you're judging
the other people.

When you tell me that you're scared that you're not going to get that need met.
He said, That's right. Now I said to him, you tell me you have an appointment to
talk to them later this afternoon, the prison officials? He said yes.

> I said, Do you think you're more likely to get your needs met if you go in
> there thinking of what's wrong with him for not having contacted you by now,
> and feeling angry about that, or are you more likely to get your needs met, if
> you go in there connected to your need for wanting to develop yourself and
> aware of your fear that you may not develop those skills?

No matter what you might say to them, *do you think you are more likely to come
out with your needs met, if in your head, you have judgments of them implying
wrongness on their part, or if you are conscious of your needs?*

(12:41) He said it's obvious. **I'm much more likely to come out of there with
what I want, if I go in conscious of my needs.** I said I'm glad you see that.
At that moment, he walked over to the other side of the room and sat down and
had a very sad look on his face. I said to him, Hey, what's going on? He looked
at me and said, I can't talk about it right now. After lunch, he came up to me
and said, with great sorrow in his voice Marshall, I wish you had taught me two
years ago about anger, what you taught me this morning. If I had known that two
years ago, I wouldn't have had to have killed my best friend.

He went on to tell me this tragic story about how the friend said some things
that just totally outraged him. Then he was thinking that he was angry at his
friend for saying those things. He wasn't aware that the friend didn't cause his
anger. The statements didn't cause his anger. It was how he thought about them
that caused his anger. He saw that if he could have connected to what his
friends needs were, behind what the friend said, or if he had been connected to
his own needs, at that moment, there would have been ways of finding out
strategy For meeting everybody's needs, and he wouldn't have had to have killed
his best friend.

(14:06)

#### This principle is very important to liberating ourselves from language

which is not conducive to our well being or peace on the planet

The awareness is that all language that implies wrongness, that is a criticism,
insult, diagnosis of pathology of others, all such languages, are the cause of
anger. Other people are never the cause, only the stimulus. The cause of anger
is our thinking. **that thinking that causes the anger is a distorted expression
of an unmet need. A distorted expression that not only interferes with getting
the needs met, but makes it enjoyable to be violent to others**.

Whenever we're angry, Nonviolent Communication shows us how to stop, breathe,
and become conscious of what you are telling yourself that makes you angry. When
you see the thinking that makes you angry, transform it into the need that it's
distorted. Ask yourself, wait a minute, what need of mine is not getting met
that's being expressed through judgment of the other person?

You'll know that you have gotten connected to your need. Your body will tell you
so your spirit will tell you so. We live in a different world when we are
connected to what is alive in us meeting our needs. We live in a different world
than when we are up in our head, judging other people in terms of rightness and
wrongness.

### Exercise for transforming a language of violence into a language of life

Learning how to become literate with a language of life, and our needs, is going
to take some practice. We're going to need to practice transforming language
which stimulates violence into a language of life. What's helped me over the
years, to develop more of a language of life, and less time of my life being
angry and judging other people, is an exercise that I do that I would recommend
to you.

(16:33) And this exercise, I keep a book with me something to write on at all
times, so that anytime I get angry, I write down the stimulus for anger. Very
often, at that moment, I don't have time to transform the thinking that creates
that anger. But I don't want to miss this learning opportunity. **When I get
angry at someone, I make a note about what did this person say or do that
stimulated my anger.** Then when I have time later on, I then say to myself, now
what was I telling myself that made me so angry, and I become conscious of the
thinking that was going on in my head that made me angry.

Just that is helpful because it keeps reminding me that it's not other people
that make me angry, it's what I tell myself. Then when I see what I have told
myself that makes me angry, I ask myself now what need of mine was not getting
met at that time, that was hidden behind the way I was thinking about the
person?

#### I translate that judgment of the other, into a need of mine that wasn't met

> Again, as soon as I get connected to that need, I'm in a different world than
> when I'm up in my head judging people.

(18:03) I like the way Rumi the poet expresses this. He says 'there's a place
beyond right and wrongdoing, I'll meet you there.' Nonviolent communication
supports us to live in the place beyond right and wrong doing. In a place where
people see each other's needs and enjoy contributing to each other's needs.
Anger tells us that we are thinking in a way that blocks our needs, that blocks
our awareness, of our needs, and the other person's needs.

```text
 “Out beyond ideas of wrongdoing and rightdoing,
 there is a field. I’ll meet you there.
 When the soul lies down in that grass,
 the world is too full to talk about.
 Ideas, language, even the phrase “each other”
 doesn’t make any sense.
 The breeze at dawn has secrets to tell you.
 Don’t go back to sleep.
 You must ask for what you really want.
 Don’t go back to sleep.
 People are going back and forth across the doorsill
 where the two worlds touch.
 The door is round and open.
 Don’t go back to sleep.”

 * [the rumi poem we should all read](https://www.elephantjournal.com/2016/12/the-rumi-poem-we-should-all-read/)
```

So it can be a helpful friend, anger. **We can use it as a wake up call, to
identify the thinking that's making us angry and transforming it into an unmet
need.**

When I was first learning how to do this transformation of my anger, it would
take me a while. Because I was very skilled at judging what's wrong with other
people in a way that would make me angry. But I wasn't very skilled at
understanding my needs, getting connected to my needs. It would sometimes be
awkward when I was angry, because I would stop right there at that time, take a
deep breath, identify the thinking making me angry, connect to the need behind
it, and then I would open my mouth. But this would take me some time and this
was awkward in certain situations.

(19:37) For example, one time my oldest son and I were having a disagreement.
This was at a time when I was first learning Nonviolent Communication and
something he said, and the way he said it, just really stimulated some anger on
my part. **I took a breath and I saw what I was telling myself self that made me
angry. I saw the need behind that. As soon as I saw the need, creating the
anger, I no longer felt angry.** Then when I opened my mouth, I came out of a
different energy than if I had reacted immediately out of the anger. But this
was taking me some time.

Meanwhile, his friends were outside waiting for him. *He said, Dad, it's taking
you so long to talk. I said, let me tell you what I can say quickly, do it my
way or I'll kick your butt.* He said, Take your time, dad. Take your time.

People who have known me in the days before I learned Nonviolent Communication
are very patient when I take my time. They know what comes out quickly. They're
willing to wait to hear what's really alive in me, and to hear that life in me,
described in a way that doesn't imply wrongness on their part.

*One way in which we can make our own life much more enjoyable, is whenever we
are thinking in a way that is causing anger, depression, guilt, or shame, to
transform that thinking into what need of ours is being distorted by the
thinking that's causing those feelings.*

## How to learn from our mistakes without losing self-respect

(21:27) Now, let's look at another way in which, by transforming that thinking,
we can make our life richer and more enjoyable. That's looking at how we can
learn from our mistakes without losing self respect. In my workshops, I do this
exercise by asking people to identify a mistake they've made recently, and when
they have identified the mistake, I asked them to tell me what they said to
themselves when they saw that they had made this mistake. If you can't remember
exactly what you said to yourself, I'm sure by now you have a pretty good idea
of how you usually talk to yourself when you're less than perfect, guess what
you might have said to yourself.

(22:24) Here are very typical statements of how people tell me they talk to
themselves when they're less than perfect.

> "What a stupid thing to do." "How could you be such an idiot?" "That was so
> selfish, what's wrong with you?"

(22:44) They have hundreds of these statements that run through them very
quickly, whenever they make a mistake. All of these statements imply wrongness
of a sort that deserves for them to suffer for what they've done. It's not hard
to understand where this comes from. Because I asked the people, what are the
first messages you could remember said to you by adults in your life when you
did something the adults didn't like. It's very clear that they are simply
repeating to themselves, the kinds of messages that they heard, when they were
children who did things that the parents didn't like. *That's bad. That's
stupid, what's wrong with you? You shouldn't do that.*

These are the first words we've heard from other people, when we haven't done
what they wanted. Of course, then we learned how to do that to ourselves.

> Now we'll know we're doing that to ourselves when we feel **depressed**,
> **guilty** or **shame**. Because *those feelings are a result of our judging
> ourself in a way that implies there is something wrong with us for what we
> did*.

(24:04) This is a very costly way to think. Not only is it costly by how it
creates depression, guilt and shame, but it also has a very negative effect on
our bodies. The more we think in ways that create anger, depression, guilt and
shame, the more heart disease in the
[medical research](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3195800/), the
thinking that creates those feelings that is referred to as *Type A think*.
**It's essentially thinking that implies badness or wrongness of a kind that is
deserving of blame or punishment.** It's a language, tragically, that the
majority of people in our society have been trained to think in terms of.

> In the exercise where I have asked people to identify what they tell
> themselves when they have made a mistake. Once they identify this thinking, I
> then suggest that they transform that thinking into the need that wasn't met,
> that stimulated the thinking.

(25:23) In other words, I tell them that all of the thinking that makes us
angry, depressed, guilt or shame is a tragic expression of an unmet need. **To
really learn from this mistake, without losing self respect, we need to mourn
but to mourn without blaming.**

This is a very important difference in Nonviolent Communication, the difference
between morning and blaming ourselves. Morning requires that we be connected to
our need that wasn't met by our behavior. When we're connected to that, we might
feel sadness, frustration. These are quite different feelings in terms of their
effect on our spirit and on our bodies, than how we feel when we blame ourselves
and feel the depression, guilt, shame.

### Unmet Needs and Self-Compassion

So, *we suggest that whenever you see yourself blaming yourself for a mistake,
become conscious of the blame, see what you're telling yourself, be conscious
that it's a tragic expression of an unmet need, and hear the need that's being
expressed behind it.*

(26:41) Now, this takes some practice on the part of people because they very
often have a very weak need vocabulary. *we suggest that everyone build at least
a vocabulary of about nine words that describe various needs that you have* and
at see if one of those words, or more, resonate when you're blaming yourself.

[![](https://i.imgur.com/ABeax3g.png)](https://www.cnvc.org/training/resource/needs-inventory)

The quicker we can transform a thinking of blame into a thinking of unmet needs,
the quicker we're going to be able to learn from our mistakes without losing
self-respect.

**We call this kind of self empathy, empathizing with the need being expressed
behind self blame, we call that morning.** Morning our limitations that we
didn't meet a need by what we did. After we have helped the person to mourn,
that is to see how they're blaming themselves for the mistake.

(27:47) And after we get them to see that the blame is a tragic expression of an
unmet need, and when they get in touch with the need to see how they feel,
sadness or discouragement, but never depression, guilt or shame.

**Then we teach people self forgiveness.** And we do that by asking them this
question. What need were you trying to meet by doing this behavior that we're
calling a mistake. Now, that's very confusing for many people because they don't
think in terms of what needs were they trying to meet. They just go quickly to
blaming themselves. It takes people a while on this exercise to stop and say to
themselves, *what need of mine was I trying to meet by doing what I did*?

For example, if it's a parent who is mourning how they screamed at their child
and some of the things they said to a child, might come out with this: *I had a
need for his safety and I was scared that what he was doing would harm him.*
Then the person can see the need they were trying to meet by doing what they
did.

(29:07) Now, once people do understand the need that they were trying to meet by
doing what they did that we're calling a mistake, there's again a relief. They
can feel some pain for what they did. But it's a relief to see that they didn't
do it because they're a bad person. They did it to meet a need of theirs. That's
what we call self forgiveness. Because as they say, in
[a course in miracles](https://acourseinmiraclesnow.com/course-miracles-chapter-16-true-empathy/),
when we empathize, there's nothing to forgive.

#### That's how we show people how to apply Nonviolent Communication when they've made a mistake

*First, be conscious of what you tell yourself*, as a result of making the
mistake, and translate the self-judgment, that's likely to be there, into an
unmet need, and **that's morning**.

Then empathize with what need you were *trying* to meet by the action that we're
*calling* a mistake. **that's self forgiveness**.

Now, sometimes the two needs are the same. That is, *the need that wasn't met is
very often the need we were trying to meet*. However, the strategy we used for
trying to meet the need just didn't work.

#### Sometimes, the need we were trying to meet does get met, but at the cost of other needs

(30:40) For example, one night I was in a hotel in one country, and I needed
some relaxation. I got my guitar out and started to play it. This was meeting my
need for recreation and rest. But then the telephone rang. It was the front desk
letting me know that my playing the guitar was keeping my neighbor awake. Well,
then I started to blame myself Oh, how can I be so dumb, etc. Then I caught
myself doing that and I said, Wait a minute, wait a minute. **What need of mine
wasn't meant by what I did?** Immediately I saw that *I had a need to be more
sensitive and responsive to my neighbors well being*. When I got connected to
that, I felt sad that I didn't feel guilty, or shame that I wasn't angry at
myself.

In this case, the need that I was trying to meet by playing the guitar was being
met, my need for recreation, but my need for respecting my neighbors health was
not met. *When I get both those needs in my consciousness, I can learn from the
situation without losing self respect*.

## Depression and self-judgement

(32:06) Over the years, a lot of people have asked me to work with them who were
very depressed. In my clinical training, I was taught to look at depression as
an illness as a mental illness. I now come to see it in quite a different way. I
now see that depression is created in the same way that anger is created by the
language which we have been educated to use. Anger is created by a language we
use when other people behave in ways we don't like. **I find that depression is
created by people judging themselves in a way that creates that depression.**

(32:59) When I'm seeing somebody who's very depressed, I ask, what needs of
yours are not being met? They very seldom are able to tell me that. *They
haven't been educated to be conscious of their needs. They've been educated to
blame themselves and others.* So, it takes a while to help these people see that
they are depressed because they are thinking. What's wrong with them, and being
disconnected from what needs of theirs are not being met.

So the conversation often goes like this. I asked them,

*What needs of yours are not being met?*

And they say,

*I'm a failure*.

See, I asked about needs, they tell me a judgment they have of themselves. I
point out this difference to them. I say, well,

*You're telling me now what you think of yourself. I'm asking what need of yours
is not being met*.

And they think again, and they say, *I compare myself to my brother and sister
and I see what they've accomplished in life. I see what I have and it just shows
me what a failure.*

Now notice there again not telling me the answer to my question of what needs of
yours aren't getting met, yet telling me this *analysis* they have of themselves
that comes from comparing themselves to their brother and sister.

[![](https://i.imgur.com/WLOUjTH.png)](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/598825.How_to_Make_Yourself_Miserable)

(34:33) I often tell such people to read the book,
[How to Make yourself miserable by Dan Greenberg](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/598825.How_to_Make_Yourself_Miserable).
You'll see in there, how we make ourselves miserable when we compare ourselves
to other people. For example, He has a picture in that book of a very attractive
man and a very attractive woman and all of their measurements are on the
picture. The exercise is take your measurements, compare them to these beautiful
people and think about the difference. This book produces if you do that
exercise, you'll be miserable in a short time.

#### I try to show people it's this kind of thinking that makes us depressed

What we tell ourselves about ourselves, that we judge ourself in a way we've
been trained to judge people. It's these judgments that imply badness,
wrongness, inferiority, abnormality, that creates the depression.

Once people have identified these judgments that create their depression, I
showed them how to transform these judgments into unmet needs. They experience
what a different world they live in when they get connected to the need that
isn't getting met, rather than get stuck in the ways in which they judge
themselves.

(36:03) One day, I was going to a workshop in one country in the evening. One of
the people coordinating my schedule in that country said Marshall, would you
think it'd be alright if I brought my daughter to the workshop tonight? She's in
a mental hospital. She's been there for some time, and she's terribly depressed
and she just sits and doesn't say anything and stares at the floor. Do you think
it would hurt her to come to your training this evening? I said, Well, there's
going to be a lot of people there and I don't think I'll be able to do any work
specifically with her but if you want to bring her I don't see any problem.

So that night, the mother brought her daughter about 19 years old to the
workshop and I could see as soon as she walked in, how sad she looked. She just
looked down at the floor and she sat down and looked down at floor the whole
night, she just seemed to be very, very depressed.

During the course of that evening, I told the group some thoughts about
depression, I mentioned a few minutes ago, that I saw depression not as a result
of an illness that people have, but simply that they're thinking about
themselves in a way that creates the depression.

That *if we can get people to identify this thinking, and be conscious that that
thinking is all a distortion of their needs, and teach them how to hear their
needs, there's a radical transformation comes about, people don't get stuck in
the depression.* They can start to **imagine ways of getting the needs met in a
more fulfilling way**.

(37:35) I gave a couple examples of that that evening. At the end of the
evening, they were going to take a picture of me for publicity purposes. Just at
the moment that they we're gonna snap the picture. It looked to me as though
somebody was coming to hit me because I saw an arm being thrown toward me. I
quickly looked over. It was this young woman, and she was throwing her arm
around me. But the picture got snapped just at that point where I was still
thinking that someone's kind of hit me. I looked very deranged in this picture.
But she had such a benevolent look on her face. It's been one of my favorite
pictures that I've kept for years. I look like the person who earlier that day
had been in a mental hospital.

As she's throwing her arm around my neck. She's saying, Thank you, Marshall.
Thank you so much for showing me that my depression is the result of what I'm
telling myself. It doesn't mean there's anything wrong with me.

(38:51) She came out of the hospital, the next day, and that was about 10 years
ago now. I've kept track of her progress with her mother, who told me she's
doing very well. The next day when she came out of the hospital, I did work with
her and give her a little bit of practice on how to identify these inner
messages that tell us there's something wrong with ourselves, and how to
translate these messages into unmet needs. To see that when we hear our unmet
needs, what comes to our consciousness, our possibilities for meeting these
needs.

When we think in the static language of what's wrong with us, that are we
selfish, stupid, inconsiderate. When we have that language going on inside of
ourselves about ourselves, that doesn't lead us to get our needs met.

Our needs are buried behind that kind of thinking.

### Why do we think that way?

(39:57) As I said in an earlier session, we think that way, because we have been
educated to think that way. We have been educated to think that way. The
structures we have been living under for a long time require people to be nice,
dead people.

> They teach this language of blame, so that we will be forever looking outward
> to authorities to see whether we are getting the right answer or the wrong
> answer, whether we're being judged as good or bad.

In those cultures, you get punished if you're bad, and rewarded if you're good.
This programs people's brains to live in that world of judgment.

#### One of my favorite plays was written by Herb Gardner called [A Thousand Clowns](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Thousand_Clowns)

(40:48) In one part of that play, two people from the educational authorities
come to the heroes house. He kept his nephew, age 12, at home and not going to
school. *The school authorities are questioning him about why he is not sending
his nephew to school*.

He answers this way, *I just want him to stay with me till I can be sure he
won't turn into another carbon copy of that ever popular modern hero, Norman
Nothing.* I want to be sure he'll know when he's chickening out on himself. I
want him to stay awake, and to know who the phoneys are. I want him to know how
to holler and put up an argument. I want to be sure he sees all the wild
possibilities. I want him to know it's worth all the trouble just to give the
world a little goosing, when you get the chance, and I want him to know the
subtle, sneaky important reason why he was born a human being and not a chair.

(42:10)

#### Nonviolent communication wants to support people to see that they are human beings and not a chair

That's why Nonviolent Communication focuses our attention on what's alive in us
and what's alive and other people, and doesn't get us stuck in thinking of what
we are. To really stay connected to our humaneness, moment by moment, requires a
language different than that in which we have been educated. It requires a
language of life.

This language of life as I have described, its core ingredient is our needs. To
be able to say at any moment what need is alive in us, when our needs are being
fulfilled, we want to celebrate. When our needs are not being fulfilled, we want
to mourn.

## Our feelings tell us what is happening to our needs

When we feel pleasurefull feelings, we know that our needs are being fulfilled.
When we feel painful feelings, or unpleasant feelings, we know our needs are not
being fulfilled.

To be fully alive requires a language of life. That requires a language of
feelings and needs.

We need to know how to translate all the judgments that have been put in our
head that involve wrongness and to be conscious that they are all tragic
expressions of unmet needs.

> As soon as we feel the anger, depression, guilt or shame, we need to be able
> to look up in our head and see the thinking that's causing it. Then translate
> that thinking into what needs of ours are not getting met.

(44:09) Another thing we need to liberate ourselves from if we want to really
enjoy being a human being, **we need to liberate ourselves from thinking that we
can cause other people's feelings**. We need to be real clear about this
important word, responsibility. We need to see what we can be responsible for,
and what we are not responsible for. When we get this mixed up, we can be
victimized by guilt tripping.

**Let me show you what I mean.**

Many parents tried to motivate their children this way. Let's say the child has
not done something that the parent would like the child to have done. For
example, clean up their room. Now the parent puts themselves in the line of
sight where the child can see them. The parent looks very pathetic. Then when
the child sees the parent looking that way, they say, "What's the matter?" And
the parent says, nothing. The child says, yes, it looks like something's the
matter, what's the matter? The parent says, it hurts me when you don't clean up
your room. Now, if the child loves the parent, and the child believes that it
was their behavior, that hurts the parent, they feel guilty.

(45:39) They may go in and clean up the room then but it will be very costly.
Any action we take out of that kind of guilt, is not taken out of caring for
people. It's taken to release ourselves from guilt, and this brings negative
associations to the guilt inducing person. Whenever we motivate by guilt, it's
costly to us.

#### In Nonviolent Communication, it is stressed to be aware that we are responsible for our own feelings

Other people can't make us feel anything. Our feelings are a result of how we
take things. We cannot make other people feel as they do. They are responsible
for how they take it.

We show we're not responsible for how other people feel. We are responsible for
our actions.

To demonstrate this, I often asked somebody to insult me. Somebody might say to
me, Marshall, you're telling boring stories. I show the group now I have several
choices of how I interpret that. I could interpret what this person just said
that I am a boring person, that I tell boring stories. If I take it that way,
I'm likely to feel shame.

But then it isn't what the other person said that made me feel shame. It's how I
took it. I believed that I was boring, and that it's bad to be boring. I would
be responsible for how I took it, and the shame I felt. The other person is
responsible for what they said, and how they said it.

Now, when the person said that to me, I could have interpreted that that was
rude of them to say that they had no right to say that to me. If I took it that
way, I would be feeling angry. But it wouldn't have been the other person making
me. They're not responsible for my anger. My anger would have been created by my
thinking, that they were rude, and had no right to say that to me.

Once again, I would be responsible for how I took it, and how I felt, and they
are responsible for what they did.

## Judging yourself for judging yourself

(48:21) One of the things that people often go through when they're learning
Nonviolent Communication, and they see how what they're telling themselves
creates their feelings, they see that they're killing themselves with thoughts
like, "that was a stupid thing to do", and its the way they took it that's
making them feel such shame and guilt.

> Very often when people see that they're thinking in that way that creates
> their feeling of shame and guilt, they say to themselves, I shouldn't feel
> that way, what's wrong with me? I've been studying Nonviolent Communication
> long enough that I should no longer think that way. *they judge themselves for
> judging themselves, which just makes them feel even worse than ever.*

We suggest that in learning Nonviolent Communication is very important to keep
conscious at all times:

- **The goal of life is not to be perfect. It's to become progressively less
    stupid.**

- So let's learn from our limitations.

- Let's learn from our errors, and see them as opportunities to develop
    ourselves.

- **Keep in mind that anything that's worth doing is worth doing poorly.**

#### I'd like to give a couple examples of how we can learn from our limitations when we transform our self-judgments into needs

(49:55) I was presenting in front of 800 teachers in a school system. I was
asked to speak at their once a year meeting. After I presented what I had to say
about how to create schools in harmony with Nonviolent Communication, four of
the school administrators were on a panel to react to what I said.

One of the persons said to me, when he heard that I was suggesting, in our
schools, we have no punishments. We didn't judge students as bad, but that we
spoke honestly with them about whether or not their behavior was in harmony with
our values or needs. We judge that way, but not judgments of a moralistic sort
that implied wrongness.

*I wasn't surprised that this might upset some of the school administrators
since this way of looking at the world is quite different than how many people
have been educated.*

> He said with rather intense voice. You know, **it's people like you that are
> causing the problems we're having in the schools nowadays with all of your
> permissiveness. Above all, we administrators and teachers must teach students
> to obey authority and do what they're told.**

(51:23) Now, something about the way he said above all just really stimulated
me. Instead of acting in harmony with the principles I was teaching, ***I got
very defensive* and said to him, it's attitudes like that, that we should just
obey authority above everything else is why 6 million people got shoved into
ovens.**

This started a very unproductive discussion between us. What made it worse. Some
people in the audience applauded what I was saying. I then got into an argument
with him about who's right, and we weren't connecting with what each other's
needs were.

That evening, as I was driving from that workshop to another one in another
city, I didn't like it all how I responded to him. The first few minutes I was
in the car, I blamed myself, Oh, what a stupid thing to do. How could you have
talked to him that way? You just ruined everything. You're never going to be
invited back to that school system again.

Then, when I caught myself blaming myself, I stopped, saw the self blame and
asked myself, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. **What need of mine
didn't get met by how I responded to that man?** Right away, I could see what
the need was it. I was not responding to him with the respect that I would like
to respond to people.

*I wasn't meeting my own need for respecting people.* When I saw that need, I
was very sad, but at least I didn't feel the kind of feelings I felt when I was
blaming myself... The shame, the guilt, the anger toward myself. I felt a deep
sadness, I could see that I was not responding to him in a way that met my need
for respecting with people.

(53:29) **Then I asked myself, What need of mine was I trying to meet by
behaving in the way that I did.**

All of a sudden, it became very clear to me what I needed was, *I needed
understanding for how frightening it was for me, to hear somebody saying, above
all, we have to teach people obedience to authority.*

The word 'above all' stimulated in the memory of how in Nazi Germany, people
were educated to believe,
[above all, you have to obey the Führer](https://research.calvin.edu/german-propaganda-archive/hess1.htm).

- When I saw both parts of myself, I mourned, that I didn't meet my need for
    respect the way I treated this person.

- I could also see that I behaved as I did, out of my need for understanding for
    how frightening it was, for me, for authorities to have this belief that
    above all, we have to teach children obedience to authority.

*Now, by being in touch with both of those needs, I have a better chance to
learn because I said to myself now, how would I have liked to have behaved
differently in that situation?*

(54:55) I realized **if I had behaved differently, I would have liked to have
understood what that person was feeling and needing behind his statement**,
"above all, we have to teach children obedience".

I realized that **he probably had a need for order and safety in the schools and
believes that this is important for having rules to maintain this order and
safety, and I had the same needs.**

#### Then I could see that we didn't have different needs. We might have had different strategies, but we didn't have different needs

If I would have heard that message with empathy and seeing that we had the same
needs, I would have responded to him in a much different way *in a way I believe
we could have learned from each other without becoming enemies.*

That night, I was presenting in another school system and a person responded to
me in a very similar way, to how the principal had responded to me earlier that
day.

This time, thanks to the learning that I went through driving in the car, when
this person said, *we have to teach children obedience to authority, that's
people like you with your permissiveness that's causing the problems we have
nowadays.* I could hear behind those words that could hear the need for order
and safety.

I said to him, Sir, are you concerned with what you hear me saying, because you
want to be sure we have order and safety in the schools and we need rules in
order for that to happen?

He said, That's right.

Then I could show him that I was also in favor of rules, but that I showed him a
different way of **establishing rules based on the
[protective use of force](https://nvcnextgen.org/2018/10/on-the-punishment-and-the-protective-use-of-force-by-jim-manske/)
and not the punitive use of force** and we connected in a very positive way.

After that meeting, he came up to me and said he was a minister at one of the
local churches. He wanted to apologize for saying the things he had said at the
beginning. He said, I see now I didn't understand the kind of program you and
the superintendent for trying to create here in the system. He said, I would
like to invite you to come to my church and give a presentation to the people in
my church, I think it would be very helpful for them. That started a connection
I had with him and his church that lasted 20 years, where twice a year, I would
go to his church and do training in Nonviolent Communication.

#### I offer this as an example of how we can learn from our limitations without blaming ourselves hating ourselves

(57:52) We do that by being conscious of what need isn't met by our behavior.
Then empathizing with what needs we are trying to meet at those times, that we
are behaving in a way that doesn't meet some of our needs.

## Training ourselves never to give our power away

Another way in which Nonviolent Communication supports people and living the
life they choose to live, instead of the life that sometimes they have been
programmed by their culture to live, is to know how to deal with other people's
messages, that come at you, in a way that never gives other people the power to
dehumanize you. I'm going to be talking in greater depth about this in a later
session on the subject of empathy.

(58:46) For the moment, I'd like to concentrate on how we can train ourselves
never to give our power away to other people.

I asked a lot of people, **What are you afraid to say?** Give me examples of
when you're afraid to be honest, afraid to be yourself, to say something.

When people in the group have thought of what they're afraid to say, they write
down what the message might sound like. I then ask them, **what makes you afraid
to say that?**

Almost everybody answers my question of why they're afraid this way. Well, I'm
afraid that *if I said that, the other person might*, and then they tell me what
they think the other person might say to them, or think of them.

(59:44) And I point out to people **how concerned I am about thinking that's
what we have to be afraid of, how other people might respond to us.** That is,
what they might say about us, or think about us.

I pointed out that by doing that, **we're giving our power to other people.**
We're thinking that our safety depends on how other people might respond to us.

I then tried to show people that our need is to be concerned with how we respond
to how the other persons response.

> That's where our safety is, in how we learn to respond to other people's
> judgments or criticism of us. Not to give our power away by thinking that our
> safety is solely how *they* might respond.

*in other words*

#### Our safety is in how we respond to other people, not in how they respond to us

I show them how we have all these choices when people say things to us:

- we can take it personally and feel shame

- we can judge them and feel angry

- or how **we can empathically connect** with them

When we do that, we can learn from whatever that person is saying in a way
that's valuable to us.

In this way, people can see that our safety is a result of how we respond. That
puts our safety in our hands, and doesn't give our power away to other people.

(1:01:30) In schools that we've created, which we call non-violent communication
schools, in some areas, and we have other names for them in other areas. In
these schools, we teach the teachers, the administrators, and the students how
to speak Nonviolent Communication. My oldest son went to a school like this,
where the students all learned Nonviolent Communication, and we want students to
know, what I was just saying, that your security rests in your hands.

> Don't ever give up your security, to the structures in which you're in, or to
> other people's messages toward you.

#### One of my happiest days, as a parent, occurred when my oldest son came back from a public school for the first time

The school he had gone to, I had had a chance to train the teachers, but in the
public school teachers communicated in a way that's not what I would like to see
teachers or administrators would communicate with students.

(1:02:39) My son came home the first day and I asked him, *how is the new
school, Rick?*

He said *it's okay dad, but boy dad, some of those teachers. Wow.*

I said What happened?

He said Dad, I was only halfway through the front door of the school, and some
man teacher comes running up to me and says "my my look at the little girl".

The teacher was reacting to my son's hair which was down to his shoulders.

So this is unfortunately rather typical of many schools.

#### Look at the lessons my son was learning from being halfway through the door

**Lesson number 1**

- There's a right and the wrong way to do everything such as how to wear your
    hair.

**Lesson number two**

- Who knows what's right? people with the highest title in this case, the
    teacher knows what's right.

**Lesson number three**

- Influence shame and guilt to get people to do is you want.

**Lesson number four**

- It's a shame to be a girl.

All of those lessons very quickly and my son's halfway through the door of the
school.

#### So I said to my son, how did you handle it?

(1:03:57) He said I remembered what you said dad that when you're in that kind
of structure, **never give the structure, or the people in it, the power to make
you submit or rebel**.

This is one of the things that I would hope we all help our children to *learn
how to come from your own spirituality, how to answer for yourself, what's the
way in which I choose to live? To learn how to sustain that, and stay conscious
of it regardless of the structures you're in, or regardless of how people within
those structures speak to you*.

I said to my son, wow, am I glad that you could remember that under those
conditions. I said, What did you do then?

(1:04:43) I just tried to hear his feelings and needs dad. I just guessed that
he was irritated and wanted me to cut my hair. This is another lesson that we
would like children to learn how to see people's humaneness no matter how they
communicate. Once again, I was very delighted that my son could remember to do
that. I said to him, how did you feel after you heard what you thought he might
be feeling and needed. *He said that I felt sad for the man. He was bald and
seemed to have a thing about hair*.

This is one of the lessons, that Nonviolent Communication is designed to help us
remember at all times, no matter what structures we're in, to never give the
structure or its rules, the power to determine what we do to make sure that each
of our actions comes from our consciousness of our own values, and our choosing
to act in harmony with our own values.

#### In this way, we are not submitting or rebelling. We're acting in harmony with our own values each moment

(1:05:53)
[Walter Wink, the theologian](https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/transformation/transforming-powers-continuing-relevance-of-walter-wink/),
says it's very important to be conscious, that institutions have their own
spirituality. Many structures are set up in a way that are designed to get
people to obey authority no matter what the authority wants them to do.

I hope that we educate ourselves that no matter what structures we're in, we
stay connected to our own spirituality. Neither submit nor rebel. Then I hope
that we all develop the skill that my son demonstrated, by no matter how people
speak to us, whatever their titles, that we try to see their humaneness, and not
to give them the power to make us submit or rebel. Not to give them the power to
create shame on our part, depression on our part, but this requires some skills
that we'll be talking about in subsequent sessions that will show us how to see
other people's humaneness, even when they are speaking to us in a violent
language, even if they have positions of power within institutions that do not
share values of compassion.

## Resources

- [O J. Harvey - Publications - NeuroTree](https://neurotree.org/beta/publications.php?pid=490)
    \- University of Colorado, Boulder
    - [Conceptual Systems and Personality Organization](https://archive.org/stream/conceptualsystem00harv/conceptualsystem00harv_djvu.txt)
- [Theologian Walter Wink Website](https://web.archive.org/web/20140104161930/http://walterwink.com/)
    \- web.archive.org
    - [Walter Wink – Theology of the Powers – Intro Reading Guide](https://englewoodreview.org/walter-wink-theology-of-the-powers-intro-reading-guide/)
    - [Transforming the powers: the continuing relevance of Walter Wink](https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/transformation/transforming-powers-continuing-relevance-of-walter-wink/)
    - [Transcript of Walter Wink’s Nonviolence for the Violent](https://www.lutheranpeace.org/articles/transcript-of-walter-winks-nonviolence-for-the-violent/)
        \-
        ([video](https://www.lutheranpeace.org/articles/nonviolence-for-the-violent-walter-wink/))
- [Beyond Right and Wrong](https://seedofpeace.org/nvc-introductory-articles/beyond-right-and-wrong/)
- [Clinical Psychology and Cardiovascular Disease: An Up-to-Date Clinical Practice Review for Assessment and Treatment of Anxiety and Depression](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3195800/)
- [A Course in Miracles – Chapter 16: The Forgiveness of Illusions – I. True Empathy](https://acourseinmiraclesnow.com/course-miracles-chapter-16-true-empathy/)
- [How to Make yourself miserable by Dan Greenberg](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/598825.How_to_Make_Yourself_Miserable)
- [A Thousand Clowns](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Thousand_Clowns)
- [The Oath to Adolf Hitler](https://research.calvin.edu/german-propaganda-archive/hess1.htm).
    Speech by Rudolf Hess on 25 February 1934
- [On the Punishment and the Protective Use of Force; by Jim Manske](https://nvcnextgen.org/2018/10/on-the-punishment-and-the-protective-use-of-force-by-jim-manske/)

[![](https://i.imgur.com/ABeax3g.png)](https://www.cnvc.org/training/resource/needs-inventory)

#### Buy this course at [Soundstrue.com](https://nonviolent-communication-sfm.soundstrue.com/)
