# Authority: Respect vs Fear - Session #6 - Nonviolent Communication Training - Marshall Rosenberg

> In this session, I'll be talking about authority, both how we exercise
> authority, and how we experience it, and how certain institutions are set up
> to give us certain qualities of authority. Nonviolent communication suggest
> that we get certain things clear when we're in a position of authority, or
> when we're dealing with people in positions of authority. Some very important
> differentiations.

[NVC Training Course Session 6 Marshall Rosenberg CNVC org](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m6f31ZfEvIs&list=PLPNVcESwoWu4lI9C3bhkYIWB8-dphbzJ3&index=6)

[![](http://i.imgur.com/ehy0DcE.png)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m6f31ZfEvIs&list=PLPNVcESwoWu4lI9C3bhkYIWB8-dphbzJ3&index=6)\\

Buy this course at
[Soundstrue.com](https://nonviolent-communication-sfm.soundstrue.com/)!!!

## Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [The person behind the title](#the-person-behind-the-title)
- [Seeing children as human beings](#seeing-children-as-human-beings)
- [Losing connection with our humaneness in positions of authority](#losing-connection-with-our-humaneness-in-positions-of-authority)
- [Not giving our power away to authorities](#not-giving-our-power-away-to-authorities)
- [The Importance of Wondering](#importance-of-wondering)
- [Resources](#resources)

## Introduction

In this session, I'll be talking about authority, both how we exercise
authority, and how we experience it, and how certain institutions are set up to
give us certain qualities of authority. Nonviolent communication suggest that we
get certain things clear when we're in a position of authority, or when we're
dealing with people in positions of authority. Some very important
differentiations.

One of these is the difference between respect for authority and fear of
authority. Getting these mixed up creates a great deal of pain for people as I
would use these terms.

#### Respect for authority involves three ingredients

When we're in a position of authority, we get respect for our authority.

One, when we know some things, or can do some things, that the people we're
working with, or living with, do not have.

Second thing is, people see these things that we know or can do, they see them
as valuable. They see how these things will enrich their lives.

And third, they see us as offering these things which we know that are valuable.
We offer we don't impose them.

Respect for authority, as I use the term, is manifest when we know things that
people don't know, or can do things that they don't know how to do. They see
that these things are very valuable and they see that these things are being
offered to them and not imposed upon them, then they would have what I call
respect for authority.

**Fear of authority is quite a different thing that is usually built into the
structure of either the family, the school, the business, the government.**

This structure gives us the right to impose things on people, that we can reward
or punish, to get people to do what we want.

Respect for authority needs to be earned. We need to clearly communicate with
people so they can see the value of what we're offering.

#### Another important difference in authority is to know the difference between obedience and willing cooperation

Obedience is maintained when people submit, because we have the power to either
reward or punish. But willing cooperation only can be received when people feel
free from this kind of coercion. And they trust that their needs as human beings
are valued. When they feel that then they are open to whatever authority we have
that might be valuable.

I was in the airport, once, in Dallas, Texas, waiting for a plane and I saw a
woman sitting with her three year old child. He was sitting very quietly right
next to her for quite a while. A grandmother aged woman seeing how the child
just sat there and Move, said to the mother, I have never seen such a well
behaved young man before. He just sits there.

The mother had on her lap, a ping pong paddle and a box of crackers. She said,
I've learned that to get children to do what we would like them to do. *You have
to have a cracker and a smacker.*

This mother was very clear, saying that she was using the kind of authority that
I would call fear of authority. She was trying to control through rewards and
punishment. If that's what we want, when we are in the position of authority,
probably the best way we could get training to do that would be to go to a dog
obedience school, and see how they train dogs.

> Working with human beings, when we're in positions of authority, we want
> people to do things because they choose to do it, because they see how it will
> enrich their lives and the lives of others to do it. That requires a radically
> different exercise of authority than many of us know how to do.

5:19 For example, in the family, people often believe that because they are the
parent, that it gives them the right to impose their learning on their children.
It's their job to make them behave. They haven't learned the lesson and my
children taught me that you can't make anybody do anything. All you can do is
make them wish they had. Whenever we do that, they'll make us wish we hadn't
made them wish they had.

**To use punishment and reward to get people to do things is very costly for the
organization and for the relationships of people within the organization.**

## The person behind the title

One of the ways that Nonviolent Communication helps people to exercise the
quality of authority that gets people to do things willingly, because they see
how it's going to enrich their own life and the lives of others to do it.

One way is not to see people as titles, but to see people for their humaneness,
even if they have titles. For example, when I used to teach at a university, I
used to find that it was hard to create the quality of connection that I like to
have when I'm in a learning or teaching situation. I like to have people
connecting with me as a person and sharing with them what's valuable to me. I
don't like to be in this position where they see me as this person who's
imposing knowledge upon them.

I used to try to figure out what can I do so that the students will see me as a
human being offering them something that's valuable to me, that I hope will be
valuable to them. How can we create that quality of connection?, even though the
institution the university makes it a challenge to do so?

After working on this for a couple of years, trying different things early in
the semester to try to figure out what can I do, so that we can get over this
culturally learned view of authority, as people who sit in judgment, it makes it
hard to see them as real people.

How do I get the students to see my humaneness? I came up with a playful little
exercise the very first day that helped a lot.

I would come into the class the first day and say, Hello, my name is Marshall
Rosenberg. Before we get started in the course, I'd like to tell you a few
things about myself that just might be interesting for you to know. I noticed
that as I came in that several of you are sitting with your legs crossed. This
is embarrassing for me to say this, but, in my culture, you show respect for
authority by sitting with both feet firmly on the ground. I wonder, if knowing
that you would be willing to sit with both feet on the ground this semester, and
not cross your legs.

The students looked at me a little strangely, they apparently never heard
something like this coming from a teacher before. Almost all of them uncross
their legs. And then I said, Now quick, before you forget. Please write down,
word for word, what you heard me say.

A scary percentage of these students heard nothing but an order or a demand.

They said you said that we had to uncross our legs.

9:12 They could hear nothing but an order they had been in schools, have been in
families, or work situations where the authorities made orders.

Other students said No, he didn't make a demand. He said it was wrong to have
our legs crossed. It was disrespectful. So others heard criticism or judgments
coming from me.

I wasn't surprised because these were graduate students. They had been trained
to hear coming from authority, demands and criticisms, and hadn't been educated
in a way that would help them see the humaneness of people with these titles.

My favorite student still sat with his legs crossed. I said to him, sir, what
did you write down? He said, I just wrote down you are nuts. I knew he and I
were gonna get along real well. Because for learning to take place, I believe it
takes place through dialogue through sharing, not by imposing by authority. And
I think that this is the same in the workplace where effective work is done, not
by orders being imposed, but by people who joined together with a common
purpose, and who see their needs being met by what is being done.

When they hear, coming from authority, requests, they see how it's in
everybody's advantage to do this. When there is this connection, where people
connect with each other's humaneness and don't let the titles get in the way,
whether it's in a family in a school In a workplace or in a government, I
believe the people will relate in a way that is much better for all, and better
for the organization.

Now, in that example, I was trying to show how by people labeling me as a
professor, how that got in the way of the human connection that I wanted to have
for teaching to take place.

## Seeing children as human beings

There's another label that I think gets in the way of quality of connection in
the family. That's when we see people as children, rather than as human beings.

Let me show you what I mean by this. When I work with parents, I have done this
exercise I put one half of the parents in one room and the other half in a
different room, and within each room, I further break them up into groups of
five and get each group a large sheet of paper and ask them to write out a role
play between themselves and another person.

In this role play, I tell each group in both rooms, the other person has
borrowed something from you. Right what you would say to this person, then write
down what you predict they would say back and keep this dialogue going.

So both groups in both areas have the same situation. How do you communicate
with somebody who borrows something but doesn't return? The only difference is
in one of the groups I tell them that the other person is one of their
neighbors. In the other group, I tell them it's one of their children. When the
group's finished with this dialogue, they come in and put it up on the wall so
that everybody can see what each of the groups in the different rooms did.

I asked the whole group then which group showed the most compassion. Now, they
still didn't know they were dealing with a different person, they both thought
they had the same situation.

**Every time I have done this exercise, everybody agreed that the person who was
labeled the neighbor got far more respect in the communication than did the
child.**

So when we are in this position of authority called parent, if we don't watch
out, we allow our cultural training to lead us to treat this person we label as
our child in a way that's far less respectful and caring than people we would
label as our neighbors.

13:53 So when I work with parents, we work at how to see this person that we
might see as our child, but when we're talking with them, we want to be sure
that the quality of the connection is the same as one would see in our
relationship with an adult, for whom we had great esteem.

Of course, our vocabulary may be different. We may have to use different words
with somebody who's three years old, then with 33 years old. But I would hope
that we would see the same empathy for this person as we would for an older
person. **I would hope that we would show the quality of honesty where we
revealed our own feelings and needs and request, not criticism and demands.
Whether this person is three or 53**.

An experience I had with my children that relates to this occurred once when I
was doing a mediation between a street gang and the police department. In this
conflict, three people had been killed, two gang members and one member of the
police department. The members of the police department that I was working with
were white and members of the street gang were black.

15:23 It was a very tense encounter. There was great stereotypes in the group
that made it hard for them to relate as human beings. Instead of being able to
see each other as humans, they saw each other by their labels, gang members or
police. It was hard to get them to see each other's humaneness.

I went home from this work, kind of exhausted, and when I got in my back door,
my three children were fighting.

I said, hey, I'm really in tense mood right now I really have a need for some
relaxation. Could you postpone this war for about another hour?

My oldest son looked at me and said, Do you want to talk about it?

I was very touched by his offering, and what went on in my head is how cute, but
*I didn't take his offer seriously because I had him labeled as a child*, my
child.

All of a sudden it dawned on me, I was doing the same thing to him that I saw
going on between the police and the street gang. **Because of the labels they
had of each other. They couldn't see each other's humaneness**. And here I am,
the same way of thinking.

It's called in the technical language "objectified". Instead of seeing a human
being in front of me, I'm seeing a title my child. I was so glad this came to me
so quickly because when I said yes, I would like to talk about it, he and my
other two children followed me into the living room, and I poured out the pain
that I was feeling to see people treating each other this way that they couldn't
see each other's humaneness.

I think I talked for 45 minutes and the three children, then aged four, or five
and eight, or nine, they all just listened very empathically. After that time, I
just felt wonderful. I recall we turned on the stereo and we danced together.

## Losing connection with our humaneness in positions of authority

> When we are in these positions labeled authority, within families, within
> schools, within the business place. It's very easy, if we don't watch out, to
> lose connection with our own humaneness and the humaneness of others, and we
> see people as titles.

I had a neighbor who was an executive of a brewery, and when I would usually see
him, it would be over the backyard fence. I would greet him and say, hi, an he
would speak to me, Hey, what's going on, man, something like that. He was
usually dressed, in the summer, in a pair of shorts and a T shirt and very easy
person to connect with to enjoy.

Over time, we started the talk, and he found out the kind of work that I did. He
said, you know, I think our brewery could use this kind of training. How about
coming down to my office, and we'll talk further about you doing some training.
I went down to his office, it was a large office because he had a high position.

Rather quickly, when I went into his office, it was though he was a different
person instead of greeting me and the way he usually did. He was very formal.
And I really had trouble believing this was the same person I had known for
about a year. He looked different. He talked different, he was a whole different
person.

Institutions can have this effect on us if we don't watch out. When we are in
these institutions, and we have these titles, **if we don't watch out, we give
the institution the power to turn us into something other than what we are as a
human being, we become the label**.

### Milgram's Research

> There's research showing the scary consequences that can happen when we give
> away our power to our titles and our institutions within which we work. Very
> scary things can happen.

For example, [Stanley Milgram](https://www.simplypsychology.org/milgram.html)
did some research. He had people come into this research and they were told
that, in this research, they were going to play the role of teachers in the
sense that someone in another room that they could see through a one way vision
room, they were told is going to be a student learning something. And whenever
they give a wrong answer to this, you are to be the teacher, and you will give
him a punishment by pushing one of these 10 buttons on the control panel in
front of you. Each button will give him a certain degree of electricity, a shock
as punishment when he gets the wrong answer.

20:29 You are to push the next button each time he makes a mistake. And that
will give him a greater shock each time. We're studying the effects of
punishment on learning. So that's why we're asking you to do this.

20:46 What the participants in this research were not told is that the man in
the other room wasn't getting any electricity. He was an actor. They were also
told he was locked into the chair and couldn't get out. So the person in the
other room, in answer to a question, makes a mistake and they push button one.

The person in the other room, the actor jumps and says, Ouch, that hurt. I
didn't know this was going to hurt so much. And another question came and then
he gave another wrong answer. And then people who are participants in the
research pushed the Next button. By the third or fourth button, the man in the
other room was crying. Later he was begging please don't push anymore. This
hurts so terribly. The last button was underneath a clearly marked possibly
lethal. And still more than half of the people in the research pushed this
button.

Milgram's research showed that when people are in this role of teacher and they
see themselves as told within this institution called a university that this is
their job. Push the button. Even though some of the people were crying, they
would felt so terrible about what they were doing.

They continue to do it because in this research experiment, they had the labeled
teacher and the institution told them to give punishment to people who made
mistakes. How scary.

There's other research that shows that
[college students brought into a situation where they are told they're prison guards](https://www.prisonexp.org/)
and other students are in the role of prisoners, locked in rooms. University
students behaved in a quite brutal way toward these other people, when they saw
themselves as guards within a prison setting and told they were to keep order.

#### If we don't watch out, we give away our power to institutions to make monsters out of us

And that can be scary because very Often the institutions that we might be
within might not be set up to maintain the kind of values that we hold within
ourselves.

As Walter wink, the Christian theologian says in some of his writings, it's very
important to be conscious that
[institutions have their own spirituality](https://books.google.com/books/about/Naming_the_Powers.html?id=ziOGWGSx_qEC).
Tragically, *very often the spirituality of the institutions that are guiding
us*, the corporate institutions, the government institutions, the school
institutions, *are not institutions having values that I believe we want to
support*.

## Not giving our power away to authorities

It's extremely important that we learn how, even when we are in these contexts,
not to give away our power to authority. That no matter how people might make
demands of us when they are in positions of authority, we hear it as a request
and never as a demand. **We don't give our power away to the authority to tell
us what we are**, we hear their humaneness behind their message.

This can be quite a challenge when they are speaking a language of domination,
and when they are in an institution that supports authorities dominating and
controlling, rather than relating in an empathic way with the people that are
labeled their inferiors.

One of the things that **I find very important to prepare our children with is
to show them how to maintain their own integrity, their own value system, even
if they are going to be in structures that have different values** than they
have.

I wanted my children to learn this because I realized that when I was a child, I
had been educated to believe that teachers know what's right, and so within the
school setting, I was giving away power to the authority. That wasn't good for
me.

For example, I could give many, but one of the ones that stayed with me over the
years, when I was in the third grade, I was taking a music class. The music
teacher told me and two other boys in tone of voice that I took as I had a
terrible voice, *she said, you three can bring comic books, but don't sing*.

I gave away my power to this teacher. I read into the tone of her voice and her
telling us that we could bring comic books but don't sing that I had a terrible
voice and that I shouldn't sing. **For over 20 years following that point, I
didn't sing**. Even when I would be in a group situation where they would be
singing together, I would never sing.

*I took her message as a judgment that I had a terrible voice, and that I had no
right to sing.*

26:26 Years later, a woman wrote some songs being stimulated by our workshop and
when she played them for me, I saw how much music added to the work. I invited
her in to sing the songs and some of my workshops, and it added a lot.

After a while, we were sitting in my office one day and I said to her, you know
that music you bring to our workshops periodically really adds a lot. I really
miss it when you're not there.

She said, Well, why don't you get a guitar and learn how to sing?

I said, Oh, I can't.

How even though I teach people the danger of this word *can't* is that it denies
choice, I used it.

She looked at me and said, *I thought you said the word can't limits us as human
beings*.

I said, "But I'm not a musician".

She says, Now you're telling me what you think you are. You tell people in your
workshops, how dangerous it is to label yourself.

Then I laughed and said, Okay, I see what's going on. **I'm still giving away
power to that teacher of about 30 years ago.** I'm still giving her power to
define what I can do.

So that afternoon, I bought a guitar and started to use music in my work. But
before I could do so I had to give myself permission to sing.

### Crow with a crippled wing

And so I wrote this song called the
[crow with a crippled wing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&amp=&v=tsu0hkHQlkA):

```text
 Though I play guitar
 Like my fingers were stoned
 And my voice is miles off key
 I remind myself
 Its OK to play whatever song is stirring in me.

 Cause I believe everyone
 has the right to dance and sing
 even if they move and sound
 like a crow with a crippled wing.

 OK crows:
 Caw caw caw caw caw caw caw caw caw caw caw caw

 Though an ox may not move like Michael Jackson
 when it starts to do its dance.
 As far as I'm concerned
 if an ox wants to boogie
 I like to see it get a chance

 Cause I believe everyone
 has a right to dance and sing
 even if they move and sound
 like a crow with a crippled wing.

 OK crows:
 Caw caw caw caw caw caw caw caw caw caw caw caw
```

### We're still free whatever institution we're in

29:35 Having learned that experience of how I had given up my authority to
teachers to define what I can do and what I am, I certainly was conscious then,
that every chance I got, whenever I was in an institutional structure, I
certainly didn't want to give away my power to the authorities.

I wanted to be respectful to what they had to offer. But I wanted to be sure
that I never gave up what I can be, or can do, or what I am, to the people in
authority diagnosing me.

#### I wanted to be sure my children learn this to not to give up their power, not to give up who they are no matter what institutions they were in

This was particularly difficult for me to get across to my daughter because she
was very caring toward everybody. And she had this idea that she needed to make
everybody happy, and she needed to be a good girl. And I saw this happening, how
she was giving up her power in so many situations, and I particularly wanted to
work with her on this.

So I started to talk to her when she was about nine years old. I said, I'd
really like you to be able to express yourself more than I see you doing. I'd
like you to do it at home, I'd like you to do it at school, I'd like you to
develop yourself, so you can be free to express your own values, no matter where
you are. And I gave her a lot of empathy for how scary this was for her.

I felt real good one day when I got a call from her school administrator. And
the school administrator called me on the phone and said, Dr. Rosenberg, would
you come in here please? I am afraid we have an unhappy girl here today.

And I thought to myself, Oh my goodness. What could it be that my perfect little
girl is in trouble in school. So I went to the school and I'm sitting in the
principal's office and the principal was obviously very upset.

She said Marla came to school today dressed in blue jeans. I told her that isn't
how a young lady dresses, **and she said, Go to hell**.

32:08 Well, I felt like celebrating. Marla has graduated from being a perfect
little subservient girl, to a real human being. ***I could see she was going
through a middle ground that people often have to go through before they become
a human being. They go through rebellion, before getting to fully being free in
their own rights to choose for themselves***.

It's important that we not be obedient to authority, that we always recognize
our choice. It's also important to recognize that rebellion is only halfway to
being fully free. If we're rebelling against authority, we're still recognizing
its power over us.

When we're really conscious that we are free to choose, at any situation, in any
environment.

I keep a picture in my office. It's actually a cartoon that helps me remember,
no matter what structure we're within, we're free. It shows two prisoners in a
prison cell strapped to the wall. It's obvious they've been in there a long time
because they're both very thin. They both have long beards. And one turns to the
other and says, Now, here's my plan.

![](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-lBNl0SmCNfE/TkOw7Yxf7AI/AAAAAAAAAcI/V8EQ2KoRrYY/s400/Now-heres-my-plan-by-Shel-Silverstein-1.jpg)

I like that cartoon to remind myself that no matter what structure I'm in, they
may control the environment, but they can't control me. I'm free within any
structure, to choose what I want to do, and why I want to do it.

#### I want to be open to what the authorities have to say, but I want to be sure that I never give power to authority To limit my choices

Now, of course, when we are within those institutions and we exercise our
freedom, we need to be aware that especially if it is an institution that uses
punishment and rewards, that exercising our autonomy can be scary at times.

I remembered that in an institution that I work that had punishments and rewards
called a university.

One day I was in my office, and my superior came to my office and said, Dr.
Rosenberg, your grades have not been handed in. This administrator at the
university was bringing to my attention that there was a rule that said grades
must be given and they were must be given at a certain date and hand it in I
hadn't done that. When he said your grades haven't been handed in, I thought I'd
bring a little light to it.

I said, You're very perceptive.

He didn't like my sense of humor. And he got even more annoyed. He said, I'm
repeating myself, your grades have not been handed in.

I said, I'm choosing not to give grades.

He said, you have to give grades.

I said, I'm choosing *not* to give grades.

It wasn't easy for him to be conscious that just because there are rules that
say you have to do things, he was stuck thinking you have to do it. And I'm
trying to tell him that for various reasons, I'm choosing to do something else.

He said, Why aren't you handing in your grades?

I said, I did write the second day of the semester, a letter to the dean,
telling the dean why I would choose another form of event valuation, other than
grades. In that letter that I sent to him, *I told him that I've noticed from
past research here at the college that minority students get 80% of failing
grades 50% of the population, I would not want to participate in any evaluation
system that discriminates on the basis of race, culture, level of income of
parents.* So that's one of the reasons.

Another reason is I'm aware of research that shows that grades contain almost no
reliability about what this person really knows. Two students can get the same
grade from two different teachers in the same subject. You don't know that those
students have learned the same thing, or can do the same things. And also grades
lead students to learn get rewards the reward of grades, I only want my students
to do things they see how it's going to enrich their life.

37:10 What I will do is give a very clear statement, measurable statement of
what the students can do at the end of this semester that they weren't able to
do at the beginning. I put all of that in a letter to the dean and said, I'd be
glad to talk about this if he had some concerns, but I haven't heard from him.
Does that answer your question, why I'm choosing to do something else other than
give grades?

Of course, they could have fired me at that institution, which they did later,
but not for that. It was another rule that I didn't follow to their satisfaction
and they chose to fire me.

So you do have to be aware, within those institutions, of the consequences of
living in harmony with your own values. **What I'm saying now I would hope that
we help ourselves and others develop is a consciousness, no matter what the
structure, that we not give away our values and succumb to what the structure
tells us to do.** That we have our own spirituality clear enough defined and we
know how to manifest, so we can sustain it, regardless of what institution we
are working in, or what government is controlling us.

#### Some of the groups that I work with find this much harder to accept than others

For example, I work with the military in a few countries. Military officers
often react rather strongly, when I suggest that people are always free to
choose, and that in a position of authority, I would want to respect that right
of people to choose.

My experience has been that when they see that I respect their right, they are
far more open to whatever I have to say that might be of value, than if I use a
language that implies may have no choice but to do what I tell them to do. Very
often this is strongly disagreed with. They tell me that these people have no
choice, they have to do what I tell them. Yet the same people will also ask me a
while later, "what do you do when you tell somebody to do things and they don't
do it".

It's time for people in those positions to become conscious that you can't
control people you can control the environment, but you cannot control people.
**When we are in a position of authority, it is not the objective to control
people. It is to offer people what we have to offer, from my position of
authority, but not to impose it**.

40:07 In many of the institutions in which I work, when people do have
themselves labeled as boss or as director or manager, they really have an image
that such people have to be beyond having any feelings.

#### They have a real fear in many of the institutions, in which I work, that you can't express feelings

People don't care for your feelings within these institutions. It's all about
profit. They don't care what you feel, it's what you produce. **Of course, when
people live within those structures, working eight hours a day, that really has
an impact**. Sadly, when they go home, they often carry that same consciousness
from the institution to their home. So they're not able to really share \[their
emotions\], with the people they're the closest.

One corporation in the United States asked me to do a special training, where
**I would first work with the wives of top executives. Then I would work with
the top executives**. When I worked with the wives, a constant theme was, how
sad they were that they didn't have more emotional contact with their husbands.
Their husbands would come home and didn't shift from the energy of the
workplace, that said, Who cares what you feel, who cares what's alive in you,
it's all about production. They didn't shift from that, to revealing themselves
openly and honestly, to maintain a loving intimate connection. They maintain the
same level of communication, not able to get in touch with their emotions and
share them.

I first worked with the wives and heard their sadness, how hard it was for them
to establish emotional connection with people who work in that other environment
each day.

42:22 Then I worked with the men. I could see, very quickly, what the women were
putting up with. They sat there, and it was very hard to get emotional contact
with them.

At one point, I got very emotional thinking of what these wives must go through,
to live with people who are in this environment, and I got so emotional that I
started to cry.

**I couldn't believe that I would cry in front of a group of top executives in a
corporation** and when I looked up, I was expecting everybody to be contempt.
And they were, I saw in everybody's eyes, you know. "What is wrong with this
guy?" Especially the boss of the group, he just looked like, you know, how could
any man cry in a setting like this?

I was glad that I had my Nonviolent Communication skills because from the look
on all of their faces, if I hadn't tried to empathize with what was going on in
them, I could have easily taken it that I'm not a real human male, that I'm
disgusting.

It wasn't easy, but I got up my courage and I tried to check out what was going
on in them.

I said to the boss, you look disgusted. Are you feeling that way? *Would you
like someone working with your group here today to be better in control of his
emotions?*

And I was shocked by his response. He said, No, no, I wasn't disgusted. *I was
just thinking about how my wife wishes I could cry.* I'm going through a divorce
right now. This is the reason, my wife says that living with me is like living
with a rock.

This gave others in the group an opportunity to open up and start to express
their pain.

They could sense that their partners wanted more emotional expression, but they
could see that **being in an environment, all day long, that operated on the
idea that profit comes first, profit above all, they could see what price they
were paying for it, in their relationships**.

#### I'm sad to say that I have even seen that this extends over into healthcare settings

People get so caught up in the mechanics of what needs to be done. But they
forget about **how important it is to maintain human connection while we're
providing any kind of service for somebody**.

This was brought to my attention very powerfully one evening in Paris, France.
One of my colleagues is a physician who was the head of a department there in a
hospital. She was attending a workshop with me. And we were going to go from
that workshop to a different workshop in another part of town.

She said Marshall on the way to the other workshop, we're going to go by the
hospital. Let's stop because I want to talk to a patient that's in one of my
programs there.

We stopped at the hospital and I accompany her up to the room. And I stood out
in the hall while she went in to talk to this patient who was hooked up to all
kinds of machinery and wires because she was having a serious problem that
required a lot of medical care.

My colleague sat and held the hand of this patient and talked with her for 20
minutes. Meanwhile, I was getting nervous because we had another workshop to do.

After this time, my colleague came out very annoyed, and she said, you see the
women in that room? Did you see all that equipment she was hooked up to? Yes,
yes. She said, you know, that woman has been in there for six hours and nobody
has talked to her in that time. Can you imagine it? **A place that can be so
skilled at knowing what equipment is necessary, but they don't know that people
need human contact**.

47:05 So many institutions that I work in, have a value system that dis-connects
people from the humaneness of themselves and of the people with whom they work.
*They'd get so caught up in productivity, which is important, but they get so
caught up in the productivity, that they lose connection with human
relationships.* Especially when they have titles that imply that they are
superior, then especially it's hard for these people to relate in a human way.

#### There's another aspect of authority that can be very destructive

That is when authority is exercised in such a way that it destroys the
creativity of people. Where the authority is exercised in a way in which it
implies that knowledge of how to do things can only come from above, that those
below have nothing to offer but to follow what those more superior know is good
for them, or for the company, or both.

## Importance of Wondering

**I learned a lesson about this from the psychologist Carl Rogers.** I took a
class with him while I was in graduate school, and how he started the class was
different than any class I had ever been in. Instead of starting with telling us
what we were to do, he introduced himself and said he was glad to be able to be
there with us, and to offer him whatever was valuable, and then he stopped
talking.

One of my classmates nervously said, well, aren't you going to teach us about
the subject matter?

And he said, so you have in mind that I have an idea of what you need to learn
about this subject.

He said, Well, yes, of course, you're the teacher.

Then Carl Rogers said, **I have the belief that the most important part of
learning is to wonder, what's worth learning**. If I come in and pretend like I
know what you have to learn, I'll have this opportunity to wonder what's worth
learning and to decide and to offer it to you. But to me, that would be my doing
the most valuable part of learning. I would hope that you would all want to do
that, that you would all want to begin by wondering, what's worth learning.

#### To me, wondering is important. It's important to wonder what's worth learning

Wow, that lesson really stayed with me really stayed with me. How important it
is when I'm in a position of authority to never imply that the people below me
haven't got the same opportunity for creativity that I do, because of my title,
that I know what should be done and their job is to comply.

When I work with children in school, I like to start with a song. I'll tell you
how this song came to be. **Whenever I work with children in schools, I like to
start by asking them, "I wonder what you wonder about?"** And when I ask this to
children aged six, in the schools, their creativity is very alive and it's clear
they've been doing a lot of wondering. They will tell me what they're wondering
about very quickly.

And then, after school, I go over what I did with the students with the
teachers. And I begin with the teachers the same way I did with the students. I
say, I wonder what you wonder about. But what a different reaction I get from
the teachers than from the students, instead of the immediate expression of the
creativity that was going on in them, that I got with the students, with the
teachers, I get silence.

Then I say **I wonder what happens to us between the time when we're six years
old, and now**. You saw how the students reacted today when I asked them what
they wonder about. I wonder what happens to us.

Typically, one of the teachers might say, I was afraid what I was wondering
about might sound stupid.

51:54 Another might say I was afraid what I was wondering about was abnormal.

I said, so that's what happens to us. We work and get educated in institutions
where our capacity to wonder to be creative is dulled, because the **institution
is structured in such a way that the authority knows what's right, what we have
to do, and our creativity and wondering gets lost**.

One day when I asked this of six year olds, I was accompanied by a woman who
writes music. She used to love to go with me to schools, when I would ask
children this question, what do you wonder about?

She kept a little book, where she wrote it all down because she decided she'd
like to write a song about what these children answered when I asked them what
do you wonder about?

One day she was with me and I said to the students, *I wonder what you wonder
about*, and it was very clear that one six year old young man had been wondering
about something for quite some time, because he immediately said, I wonder why
my puppy won't eat green jello with grapefruit? My friend used that as the
stimulus for her to write the song she wanted to write, and she went home and
she wrote the following song. All of the lines in this song came directly from
the children, except for about four lines, which she added for purposes of
rhyme.

53:40 [I wonder](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O7CZ_ElfLk0)

```text
I wonder why my dog won't eat green jello. I like the wiggly way it melts inside.

I wonder when a turtle pulls its head in
Is it so dark it's scared to be inside.

Wonder if a rock likes being hard.
Wonder if the sky likes being blue.

I wonder if butterflies like butter.
I wonder if you like being you

I wonder why I don't feel myself stretching.
People say I'm growing every day.

I Wonder why I always have to listen
to more words than I ever get to say.

I Wonder if the grass cries when it's cut.
I Wonder if the rain hurts when it falls

I wonder if the earth gets dizzy turning.
I Wonder if the little worms feel small.

I Wonder why I see so many people
do things they don't really want to do.

I Wonder if the music goes away somewhere
After I sing my song to you

I Wonder if it feels sad to be old?
I Wonder if the moon likes company.

I wonder why it's fun to view a little scared.
I wonder if you wonder like me.
```

55:32

#### I would like us all to do some wondering

...and on the basis of this wondering, take actions that free us from authority
and institutions that function in ways that are not conducive to our living the
lives we choose to live.

I'd like us to wonder whether we have fully developed our ability to stay human,
even when we're in the institutions that make it a challenge to stay human.

**I'd like us to wonder whether we have learned to express our humanity, even
when we are labeled in a way as superior or inferior.**

I hope that we are wondering whether we have fully developed our ability **to
see the humaneness of people in positions of authority, who aren't able to stay
connected to their humaneness and who speak a language of domination and who use
punitive tactics**.

I'd like us to wonder whether we have fully developed our ability to see that
person's humaneness, and that we can communicate with them and show them other
ways of getting all needs met, beside the ways that we have been trained to use
power within domination systems.

#### I'd like us all to learn how to use power with people, not power over people

#### Buy this course at [Soundstrue.com](https://nonviolent-communication-sfm.soundstrue.com/)

## Resources

- [Anger and Domination Systems](https://www.cnvc.org/what-nvc/articles-writings/anger-and-domination-systems/anger-and-domination-systems)
- [Stanford Prison Experiment](https://www.prisonexp.org/)
- [Stanley Milgram](https://www.simplypsychology.org/milgram.html)
- [Naming the Powers: The Language of Power in the New Testament](https://books.google.com/books/about/Naming_the_Powers.html?id=ziOGWGSx_qEC),
    Walter Wink
- [Crow with a crippled wing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&amp=&v=tsu0hkHQlkA)
- [I wonder](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O7CZ_ElfLk0)
