# Role of Sincere Gratitude - Session #9 - Nonviolent Communication Training - Marshall Rosenberg

> In this session, I'll be talking about the role that sincere gratitude plays,
> in helping us to remember what Nonviolent Communication is intended to serve,
> and to help us to maintain the energy that it takes to stay compassionate in a
> world that often makes that quite challenging.

[Nonviolent Communication 9 Marshall Rosenberg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3JXcbtjIzas&list=PLPNVcESwoWu4lI9C3bhkYIWB8-dphbzJ3&index=9)

[![YouTube Still](http://i.imgur.com/ehy0DcE.png)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3JXcbtjIzas&list=PLPNVcESwoWu4lI9C3bhkYIWB8-dphbzJ3&index=9)\\

Buy this course at
[Soundstrue.com](https://nonviolent-communication-sfm.soundstrue.com/)!!!

## Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Expressing Gratitude](#expressing-gratitude)
- [Exercises in Gratitude](#exercises-in-gratitude)
- [What keeps us from expressing gratitude?](#what-keeps-us-from-expressing-gratitude)
- [What gratitude haven't I expressed yet?](#what-gratitude-havent-i-expressed-yet)
- [Marshall's uncle who took care of grandmother](#marshalls-uncle-who-took-care-of-grandmother)
- [Other reasons we don't express gratitude](#other-reasons-we-dont-express-gratitude)
- [Receiving Gratitude](#receiving-gratitude)
    - [Why it's so difficult to receive gratitude](#why-its-so-difficult-to-receive-gratitude)
- [The Gratitude Book](#the-gratitude-book)
- [Non-sneaky Bragging](#non-sneaky-bragging)

## Introduction

0:00 In this session, I'll be talking about the role that sincere gratitude
plays in helping us to remember what Nonviolent Communication is intended to
serve. And to help us to maintain the energy that it takes to stay compassionate
in a world that often makes that quite challenging.

In an earlier session, I described the spirituality that Nonviolent
Communication was designed to serve. **This process Nonviolent Communication has
great power to enrich our lives, when it is our intention to create the
connections necessary for compassionate giving to take place**. It's a great
tool to support our being conscious of what's alive in others, and to hear
what's alive in others in a way that makes giving enjoyable.

It's a process that helps us to share that information with others, how to be
honest and share what's alive in us in a way that enables others to enjoy
compassionately giving to us.

A very important component in keeping this consciousness alive in us is the
process of expressing gratitude to one another, in a way that can be trusted,
that it is a celebration of life, and not a form of communication that's
designed to manipulate us to do things that others want.

To clarify this, I'd like to make a difference between sincere gratitude and
praise and compliments, very clear. **Praise and compliments are given for the
purpose of rewarding**.

Parents, teachers, managers in industry that I have worked with, have told me
that they have been in programs that have taught them that if you praise and
compliment people daily, they work harder.

**Parents** use praise and compliments, to reward their children, to do things
around the house that they want them to do.

**Teachers** have been educated to use praise and compliments to get students to
work harder.

**Managers** in industry tell me that they have been through similar programs.

I point out to all of these groups, if they look at the research based on people
using praise and compliments as rewards, they'll see that it isn't that
effective when used as a reward. It's only effective for a short time until the
people see that the praise and the compliments are really not sincere
expressions of gratitude.

But *they are at attempt to manipulate them to behave in ways that others want
them to behave*.

Research shows that **when people sense that the praise and compliments are
given out of that energy, they lose their desire to work harder and to
contribute to what the authorities want them to do**.

From the very beginning, I'd like to make it clear that the way of expressing
gratitude that we'll be talking about in this session, the intent is to
celebrate life, not to reward people for doing what we want them to do.

By celebrating life, **I mean that we let people know how our needs have been
fulfilled, and how our life has been enriched by something they have done**. Our
only intention is to celebrate that, and not in any way to put them under
pressure to continue doing that which we would like them to do.

## Expressing Gratitude

4:17 The difference between Nonviolent Communication and other forms of
communication that involve giving praise and compliments is the way in which the
gratitude is expressed in Nonviolent Communication.

#### Gratitude is expressed by saying three things that allow the other person to see how their actions have enriched our lives

Those three things are:

- **We tell them what they have done, that has enriched our life**.
    (Observation)
- **We express how it has, by letting them know the need of ours that was
    fulfilled by the action** (Needs)
- **How we feel as a result of that need being fulfilled.** (Feelings)

We have talked about this in many other sessions, how to express clear
observations, feelings and needs. However, in most of the other sessions, we
have been seeing how to do that as part of our honesty when people have done
something that we do not like, that's not in harmony with our well being.

#### When we express gratitude, we use the same ingredients of clear observation, expressions of feelings and needs

But now we're talking about actions that have contributed to our well being and
needs that have been fulfilled, and the pleasureful things that follow these
needs having been fulfilled.

The form that is used in Nonviolent Communication is clear on observations,
feelings needs.

It's not in the form of compliments which judge people as that was a good thing
that you did. You're a kind person, you are very attractive.

Instead, **we translate any compliments and rewards into a language of life that
tells what was done and how life was enriched by it**. And the motive is always
important to keep clear. We're expressing this not to reward not to manipulate
people into doing what we want them to do.

#### We are expressing the gratitude solely to celebrate life

Now, it's extremely important that we build into our lives, opportunities to
exchange sincere gratitude, that we have opportunities to express it to others
and to receive it.

> Every time we receive sincere gratitude, it helps us to remember how good it
> feels to contribute to the well being of human beings. How good it feels to
> contribute to our own well being, to the well being of others, how good it
> feels to celebrate that.

We'll see in this session that there's many things that happen to block the
exchange of sincere gratitude.

## Exercises in Gratitude

In my trainings, I do some exercises that not only show people how to express
gratitude, but make us highly aware of what are these forces in our lives that
keep the flow of sincere gratitude from happening.

One of these exercises, **I ask people to think of a gratitude they would have
loved to have received from somebody but they didn't**.

Then we use that as a chance to practice what it would have sounded like if that
person would have known how to express the gratitude in a Nonviolent
Communication manner.

That is, what would they have said, to *make clear what we did*, and *how they
felt as a result* of our doing this, and *what was needed that was met*.

After the people have written down what the gratitude would have sounded like,
had it been expressed in a Nonviolent Communication way, by the other person.

8:37 I asked them to imagine going to that person and doing the following. This
might require a bit of imagination on your part, particularly if the other
person is no longer alive. I say, whether the person is alive or not, **imagine
going to that person and telling them that you were in a workshop that asked you
to write down a gratitude that you would have loved to have received and
didn't**.

You tell this person, the gratitude that you would have liked to have received
and didn't.

You read it for them so they can hear word for word, what would have sounded so
precious for you to have heard.

Then, after you imagine saying that to the person, then ask them this question.
What kept you from expressing it? Then imagine what their reaction might be to
that question of what kept them from expressing it.

#### I do this exercise because I want us all to be highly aware both of the importance of keeping gratitude a central part of our lives

To do that we need to be conscious of the many things that go on, that keep
gratitude from being expressed when it is desperately needed to maintain our
energy for living a life of compassion.

Then when people have had a chance to do those two things, I asked them to read
off both what the gratitude would have sounded like, had it been expressed in a
Nonviolent Communication manner. And we look at the reasons why people believe
they didn't receive the gratitude.

**Then I asked the people to think of a gratitude they themselves have not
expressed** that they would really feel horrible if they didn't get a chance to
express it to the other person before that person died.

I ask them to write down the gratitude in a way that communicates the three
things we're trying to create.

**When we express gratitude in a Nonviolent Communication way**:

- make it clear to the other person what they did that enriched your life
- how you feel right now, when you think about that
- and what need of yours was fulfilled.

## What keeps us from expressing gratitude?

After they have a chance to practice expressing the gratitude in this way, I say
to them,

#### What has kept you from expressing this gratitude, if it has meant so much in your life, that you would hate this person to die without having heard it?

What has kept you from expressing it till this point?

Then write down that answer.

Then we look as a group on what are the forces that go on within us and that we
think go on within others that keep us from having an open flow of gratitude.

### Some people unfortunately, think that gratitude is un-necessary

They think there's just certain things you should do. It's your obligation and
duty, and that you shouldn't have to get any gratitude for doing, you should
just do it.

I feel very sad at how many people seem to have that feeling, and how many
people work in workplaces where gratitude isn't really expressed, where people
are expected to do certain things, and they feel obligated to do it.

There's no space in that kind of thinking for sincere gratitude to be part of
the workplace or the living environment. Many people not only think it's not
necessary to say it, they don't see any reason why they should have to hear it.

If they know that it is their obligation, why bother to have to hear any
gratitude, you just do the work because, you know, it is your obligation or
duty.

### Confirmation that we are serving life

To get people out of this framework, I've been telling a story for years. This
funny story, jolts a lot of people out of this idea that we don't need
gratitude. It's just if we do things out of the proper energy, that should be
enough, why bother to get any gratitude?

Then especially when I tell them, we don't want to use gratitude as a reward,
then they say, Why get it at all? If you do something, and you know you did it
for the right reasons to contribute to people's lives. Why do we need the
gratitude?

13:45

#### I tried to point out to them that our intention to enrich life isn't enough. We do need confirmation that our intention has been fulfilled

The story that I tell them, to jolt them out of thinking that it's only
important that our intention be to give and we don't have a need for any
confirmation.

I tell them the story about two motorcyclists who are out on their motorcycles
on a chilly day. It's so chilly, they get off of their motorbikes. They put
their black leather jackets on backwards, so the color of the jacket protects
their neck. They get back on the motorcycles and take off again and in a short
time have a tragic accident. They hit a patch of ice.

When the ambulance driver arrives on the scene, the ambulance driver sees a good
samaritan standing over them. And the ambulance driver says to the Good
Samaritan, what happened to them? And the Good Samaritan said, I'm not too sure.
They seem to be doing all right until I straightened their neck.

I'm pleased that how many people get the point. It's not enough that our
intention is to enrich life. We need confirmation. Because very often it may be
our intention to enrich people's lives but what were doing can have the exact
opposite effect.

So, gratitude, when sincerely expressed is very important. We need to confirm
that our intention to enrich life has been fulfilled. It's further important
because when we get that confirmation, we feel a joyful feeling, a natural
joyful feeling that comes when we see that the power we have can enrich life.

It has been my experience that there is nothing more fulfilling for human beings
than when they exercise this power to enrich life and get confirmation that they
have done so they can really experience how their efforts have enriched other
people's lives.

The more we carry that energy within us, that comes when we receive this
confirmation, the easier it is to continue to relate in a compassionate way with
other people, even under difficult conditions.

What can feel better than using this power we have to enrich life, in the
service of life, and seeing how our efforts have made life more wonderful for
people?

Given its importance and power, it's all the more important that we look at what
is keeping us from doing it.

#### So what are some of the things that people have told me keep them from expressing the gratitude that they have but haven't expressed?

What do they believe has kept other people from expressing gratitude to them
that they would have liked to have received? I started trying to clarify what
were the forces that were keeping so many people from expressing gratitude.

I got a real good start at this reading a passage of a book by John Powell
called
[The Secret of Staying in Love](https://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/2912048-the-secret-of-staying-in-love).
In this passage in the book, John Powell was mourning deeply that he had not
expressed a lot of gratitude that he felt toward his father.

He had never expressed this gratitude while the father was alive. It was very
sad for him to see just how much his life had been enriched by the Father. And
yet he hadn't expressed his gratitude and he got in touch with what kept him
from doing it.

17:59 **What kept him from expressing the gratitude is while the father was
alive, he had so much anger toward the father, that he didn't get in touch with
the gratitude that he also felt**.

This is so for most of us, when we're in a lot of pain, and we don't know how to
deal with the pain, we get stuck in the pain.

Even though things are enriching our lives, it's hard for us to put our focus on
that and to celebrate that and to express gratitude.

**Our ability to express gratitude well, is highly correlated with how well
we're able to express our pain, and receive empathy for our pain, and transform
the pain**.

The better we're able to do that, the more access we will have to celebrating
that in life which is enriching life.

> If we are blocked in knowing how to express ourselves, so that we can get an
> empathic reception of what's bothering us, we get stuck and don't have the
> energy or the consciousness or both, to really express sincere gratitude.

## What gratitude haven't I expressed yet?

Having read what John Powell wrote about his sadness, at not having expressed
this gratitude he felt toward his father, **I wondered, oh my goodness, what
gratitude might I have within me that I haven't expressed yet that I would hate
not to express**?

*Immediately, about 12 things came to me, 12 things that other people had done
in my life that had enrich my life very deeply, and I hadn't expressed the
gratitude yet*.

#### I wanted to avoid the sadness that John Powell experienced when he realized that he hadn't expressed this gratitude to his father

I wanted to make sure that this gratitude that I was feeling but hadn't
expressed, I would hate to think that the other person would die before they
could really know how their actions had enriched my life.

I wanted to find out what kept me from doing so, for each item of gratitude that
I hadn't yet expressed. I asked myself the question, what kept me, up until this
point, from expressing that. I then took steps to make sure that as soon as
possible, I would get to these people, so I would have a chance to express the
gratitude in person.

## Marshall's Uncle who took care of Grandmother

One of the gratitude that I realized I hadn't expressed yet, I made reference to
in an earlier session. I mentioned how it enriched my life to see my uncle come
to my house each day and help my mother take care of my grandmother, who was
totally paralyzed.

I mentioned in this previous session, how much that meant to me, to see that
there was this quality in human beings that they enjoyed contributing to one
another's well being, how much I needed to see that and experience that at a
time in my life when there was so much violence going on around me.

**When I went to the uncle the next time, I had an opportunity, because I wanted
him to know, and I realized I had never told him what a profound effect that
gratitude had on my life**.

How I kept thinking about it over the years, how it was never far from me, how
much it meant my need to remember that we human beings were meant to contribute
to each other's well being, not to get caught up in all the violence.

I expressed that to him, I'm pleased that I made it pretty clear. **I let him
know that smile enriched my life in such a profound way. And I could see in his
eyes that he received the gratitude, I could see how it was enriching him**.

I also asked him, I said, uncle, how did you learn to do that? How did you learn
to stay compassionate? I understand that you had a rough upbringing that you
went through a lot of trauma in your life.

#### How have you managed to stay compassionate so well?

22:40 He liked the question, and he thought for a while and he said, Well, you
know, I was very fortunate to have good teachers. **I also happened to be around
people who, I saw, enjoyed contributing to other people's well being. It was
easy to learn from them**.

I said, Could you give me an example who one of these people were?

He said, you know, the best teacher of all I had, it was your grandmother. Of
course, when you lived with her, she was very ill.

When she wasn't ill, oh, how wonderful it was to be around her, and to see how
she contributed to people's well being, and how much joy she felt in that, and
how much people received from that and how much they enjoyed her presence. I
learned so much from her.

I said, Could you give me an example of one of the things that she did that had
great power for you in helping you remember the joy that we feel in contributing
to people's well being?

He said, Well, there's so many things she did. It's hard to pick one out. He
said, Well, as your mother told you about the time that she brought Taylor and
his wife and two children into the house when they lost their house during the
depression. They stayed in the house for five years.

*Yes, my mother told me that story, uncle*.

Then he went on and told me two other examples of how my grandmother helped
people in distress, as well.

*Yeah, my mother told me that*.

#### And he said, then certainly she must have told you about Jesus

*I said, What? No, she didn't tell me about Jesus*.

He went on to tell me this story about Jesus.

One day a man showed up at my mother's back door, he had a wild beard. Around
his neck, he had a tree branch in the rough shape of a cross. Like many people
did, knowing my grandmother's generosity, *he said he was hungry and would
appreciate some food*.

She invited him into her kitchen. While he was sitting there eating, she asked
him his name.

24:54 *And he said, my name is Jesus.*

Now, my grandmother Ask him, and what is your last name?

*He said, I'm Jesus the Lord*.

When my uncle came in the room, my grandmother introduced him as Mr. The Lord.
My grandmother's english wasn't too good. She then asked this man, where do you
live?

*He said, I don't have a house*.

She said, Where are you going to sleep tonight? It's very cold outside.

*He said, I don't know*.

She said, Would you like to stay here?

*He stayed seven years*.

After my uncle told me that story, I asked my mother that night, Mother, how
come you never told me the story about Jesus?

*Oh, she said, I thought I had. It was a story like that almost every day about
your grandmother.*

I was very touched by this story of my uncle telling me how he had been enriched
by my grandmother's generosity to people, and how that strengthened him to enjoy
being generous.

#### That night, a song came to me about my grandmother and Jesus

```text
 One day a man named Jesus
 came around to my grandmother’s door.
 He asked for a little food,
 she gave him more.

 He said he was Jesus the Lord;
 she didn’t check him out with Rome.
 He stayed for several years,
 as did many without a home.

 It was in her Jewish way,
 she taught me what Jesus had to say.
 In that precious way,
 she taught me what Jesus had to say.

 And that’s: “Feed the hungry, heal the sick,
 then take a rest.
 Never walk when you can dance;
 make your home a cozy nest.”

 It was in her Jewish way,
 she taught me what Jesus had to say.
 In her precious way,
 she taught me what Jesus had to say.

—“Grandma & Jesus” by Marshall B. Rosenberg
```

## Other reasons we don't express gratitude

28:30 Now I'd like to discuss the reasons that people tell me that they
themselves have not expressed gratitude yet, that they want to be sure they do
express.

What they think the reasons might have been why gratitude they would have liked
to have received, but they didn't.

#### One of the most frequent reasons that people tell me they don't express gratitude

- they think the other person knows
- that it's not necessary.

That was one of the reasons I saw that kept me from expressing some of the
gratitude that I didn't express yet.

I tell people, when that's their reason for not expressing it, I tell them that
**I went to the people that I didn't express my gratitude to**, because I
assumed that they knew it, and **I asked them, Did you know?**

**half of them did and half of them didn't**.

But even the ones who did still told me they would have liked to have heard it.

Since then, when I tell myself, Well, it isn't necessary to express gratitude,
they know. I'm also now quite eager to express the gratitude, even if I think
they do know it. I still want to have the opportunity to express it directly and
have them receive it.

**Another frequent reason why people tell me they don't express the gratitude**.
They're afraid that it would be embarrassing for the other person, the other
person would not know how to take it in very well.

I certainly had that, for one of the gratitude that I didn't express to my
father. There was something that he had done that I found greatly enriched my
life. When I asked myself, why didn't I express it?

It was for that reason that I guess that it would be not easy for him to take
him that gratitude.

But, I certainly wanted to be sure that he did take it in before, it was no
longer possible for me to tell him.

The next time I met with him, we went out for a walk together, which we usually
did. While we're on the walk, I said Dad, I'd like to express a deep gratitude.
I for you, and before I went any further, just what I predicted would happen was
starting to take place, **I could see he got very nervous and said, Oh, don't
worry about expressing anything like that, you know, I mean, you're a good
son**.

I said, Dad, I really would like you to hear it. It's a very deep gratitude. And
I really want to express it. I told him what this gratitude was, what he had
done and how much it had enriched my life.

I saw it was hard for him to take in. But I could see in his eyes, something
happened to him as a result of taking it in. And we continued on our walk
silently for about 10 minutes after I express the gratitude.

Then he said to me, You know, I've been thinking, I can't remember ever hearing
a gratitude from my own parents.

I could understand from the life that he led as a child why that happened. My
grandparents were very loving people, but they were all poor. Just doing the
work that was required to survive took everybody's energy. Under those
circumstances, it's often not easy for people to get out of their pain long
enough to celebrate life and to express gratitude.

## Receiving Gratitude

32:27 I thought how horrible that would be for people to not get gratitude. Over
the years since then, I've asked a lot of groups, are there anybody in the group
that has never received a sincere gratitude, as we're learning how to express
now?

**It's sad to me how many people in the group cannot recall really receiving a
sincere gratitude that deeply enrich their lives**. They can recall people
saying some thank yous, but they **couldn't remember ever receiving a gratitude
expressed**, that clearly communicated, **what was alive in the other person
when they did what they did** for that person, and how that person's life was
enriched.

How sad that this can go on, and we don't take time in our lives to celebrate,
or we don't know how to express it.

We're afraid that it's going to embarrass people, so we don't express it.

#### It's not only important to express gratitude, it's also very important to receive it well

I find out this is one of the hardest things for people to do in a way that's
consistent with Nonviolent Communication principles.

Nonviolent communication suggests that we empathically commit with any message
that's coming at us, that we hear the feelings and needs be expressed by the
person.

Well, **if a person is expressing the gratitude to us, this means to hear the
feelings and needs being expressed**, to see how our actions enrich the other
person's life to connect them perfectly with that.

But for many reasons, I find this is very hard for people to do. As I told you,
it was hard for my father to do he had not been in an environment where much
gratitude was expressed, he just didn't have much opportunity to know how to
deal with credit.

There are several other reasons why I find that it's very hard for many people
to take in gratitude empathically just to receive and celebrate how other
people's lives have been enriched by what we have done.

### Why it's so difficult to receive gratitude

#### A lot of people tell me just how difficult it is for them to take in the gratitude

I've asked people what makes it so hard?

There's various reasons why, people give me, but some of the most popular ones,
some people will say, well, it's my duty to do that, you know, **why should I
feel good about it, or take it in? It's just what I was paid to do or what I'm
supposed to do**.

Just as it's hard for us to express gratitude, if we have this thinking of
obligation, duty, and that's why you do things and that's all that's necessary.
Just do what's right, because it's your obligation.

That means we often don't express gratitude, thinking it's the other person's
duty and obligation, they shouldn't need any gratitude for it.

The same thing goes about receiving gratitude. If we've been educated to think
it's our duty, we can't hear easily, how the person's life has been benefited by
what we have done. We're not used to that.

### Thinking we don't deserve gratitude

Another reason that people tell me that it's very difficult for them to receive
gratitude, is they think I didn't deserve it.

*You know, I mean, it was just a little thing. I didn't deserve it*.

Here again, we see still another aspect of the sad judicial system we've been
living under, based on this concept of deserve. Retributive justice. If you're
good boys and girls, you deserve to be rewarded. If you're bad boys and girls,
you deserve to suffer.

Not only does that justify violence, punishment, that kind of thinking, but it
blocks us from being able to take in and celebrate gratitude.

Because we have to really wonder, did I deserve it?

### Thinking we should be humble

A third, commonly expressed reason people tell me They don't receive the
gratitude very easily is they say,

> Doesn't that mean you're egotistical to take in gratitude and feel good about
> it? We should be humble.

37:18 I warn people about that concept, how to not get it mixed up. Certainly we
don't want to think we're greater or better than anybody else.

#### If we think that to be humble means to deny and not take in the beauty of what we can do, how sad

I tell people that have this concept of humility. I tell them about something
that Golda Meir, the Israeli Prime Minister, once said to one of her
politicians, who was always acting very humbly she said to him one day, *don't
be so humble, you're not that great*.

By far what I consider the most frequent reason that people don't receive
gratitude well, is said very powerfully in the Course in Miracles. When they say
[it is our light, not our darkness, it scares us the most](<https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Marianne_Williamson#A_Return_to_Love:_Reflections_on_the_Principles_of_%22A_Course_in_Miracles%22_(1992)>).

When we have been living under a domination culture, where we are rewarded and
punished by authorities told to do things out of duty and obligation, it's hard
within that structure to really feel that we are created out of divine energy.

It's really hard to be conscious that we have this power to enrich life, and
it's hard to celebrate that because **we have been trained to think in a way so
different than that, in a way that was designed to get us to be obedience to
authority and not designed to help us be conscious of the power we have to
enrich life**, and how joyful it is to use that power, and see it coming into
fruition in the gratitude that we receive from other people.

#### When I was looking at the problem that so many people had receiving gratitude, I wasn't aware of how much trouble I was having with it

I'd be very grateful that a friend of mine, who is a musician, and had been
writing songs that I very much valued and had started to use in my trainings.
One day she told me how grateful she was about what she had received from me in
the workshops, and how grateful she was that it was now stimulating her to write
music that she found was enjoyed by so many people.

**So she expressed such a deep gratitude to me, and I was uncomfortable
receiving it**.

I said something like, *Oh, I'm glad that you found it helpful*.

She could sense that I wasn't really comfortable receiving the gratitude.

She brought this to my attention. She said, Now, Marshall, I didn't feel like
you really receive my gratitude very empathically now.

I looked inside and I said, Yeah, I can see that I didn't. What went on in me
when you gave me that gratitude, when I saw how much it had enriched your life,
**I was starting to hear some obligations, some demands, now I had to keep
enriching your life. Now that I saw that I had that power, I was feeling like I
have to do something with it. I was making a demand of it**.

She told me how painful that was, her gratitude hadn't been received
empathically, and the next day, she came in and had written a song about how
painful that was for her.

She went back that night and was still feeling uncomfortable that she had poured
out her heart so openly and **she could see that I didn't receive it
empathically and she wrote the following song**.

It really helped me to see how important it was to learn how to receive
gratitude empathically

### When I come gently

41:37

```text
When I come gently to you,
I want you to see
it's not to get myself from you,
it's just to give you me.

I know you can't give me me,
no matter what you do.
All I ever want from you, is you.

When I come gently to you,
I want you to know,
I come not to trespass your space,
I want to touch and grow.

When your space and my space meet,
each is not less but more.
We make our space that wasn't space before.

When I come gently to you,
I want you to see,
it's not to get myself from you,
it's just to give you me.

I know you can give me, me,
no matter what you do.
All I ever want from you, is you.
```

43:25 Two weeks later, we both had an opportunity to continue our learning about
how difficult it was, both to express gratitude, and not have it received well,
and why it was so difficult to receive it. Except now we reversed the roles
because two weeks later, I was expressing a deep gratitude to her, about how
much the music that she brought into our training, how much it enriched my work
and my life.

I expressed it pretty deeply and I could see that she couldn't take it in, and I
could see how badly it felt to really be coming from the heart with a gratitude
and not have an empathic reaction to that.

That night, she went home and could really see how hard it was for her to
receive gratitude, and this song came to her.

#### This song is called *Why is it so hard to believe?*

44:33

```text
Your arms are warm around me,
their welcome is complete.
Your voice it channels through me
The syllables are sweet.
Your eyes are pure as darkness
too compelling to deceive.

Why is it so hard to believe?
It's just as much a mockery,
to touch the truth and be unable to receive it,
as to speak hypocrisy,
to stand before a gift of self,
unable to receive.

Why is it so hard to believe?
If somehow I could see myself
through your honest searching eyes.
Perhaps I could accept myself
Come to realize
that it's not so incredible,
that love should come to me.

Why is it so hard to believe?
I know how much I love you
how much I want to give
your trust affirms my love for you,
Lets my loving live.

To give is domination, if I can't also receive
Why is it so hard to believe?
```

## The Gratitude Book

46:44 Given that both giving and receiving gratitude is so important in
maintaining our consciousness of the spirituality that is necessary for
Nonviolent Communication to have its power.

I think it's very important to look at our lives and see, are we creating the
space to do it?

It's not only difficult, sometimes, to express it, when we have the space, or to
receive it, when it's being expressed. Very often, we don't create space in our
lives for celebration.

**We get so busy that we don't have the time or space built, to do this, and
then I think we pay dearly for it because we don't get the juice, the energy
that we need to live in harmony with compassion.**

I've done some things that have been very helpful to me and built some things
into my life that helped me to remember to leave space for sincere gratitude and
celebration.

For example, one of the things that I have learned to do each day, which I'm
very grateful for, is I keep a book, a gratitude book.

### Before I go off into the world that day, I like to make some entries into my gratitude book

Now, what do I put in that book?

48:18

#### I like to think of at least one thing that I have done within the last 24 hours that I want to celebrate

It might be something I did that enriched just my life, or it might have been
something I did that contributed also to someone else's well being.

What I like to do is write down what it takes to help me see those three things,
that are central to gratitude, as expressed in a Nonviolent Communication way.

I write down something that helps me be clear what did I do that I want to
celebrate?

Second, I write down how am I feeling at the moment that I'm doing this, how do
I feel right now, remembering what I had done?

Three, I write down what need of mine was fulfilled by my doing that. Then when
I have those three things written down, I want to celebrate it, I want to take
it in.

When I can slow down and just take in what I can do, how good it feels to see
how I've enriched life, how good it feels to see what need of mine was met by
doing that, to slow down long enough to take that in, I draw a little flower
just to give myself the time to celebrate.

Now on many days, I may write down more than one thing. I may write down several
of them, but I want to at least think of one.

I like to start the day by thinking of at least something I've done that has
enriched life and how good it feels to do that.

#### Then I think of something somebody else has done that has enricheded my life in the previous day

I write down those three things:

- I write down what they did.
- I write down how I feel about them having done that.
- And I write down what need of mine was fulfilled by their doing that.

50:19 Then I draw flower, just to slow me down so I can just let in what they
did and how good it felt.

Then I asked myself this question, **have I expressed clearly to that person,
just how much my life was enriched by that**?

50:47 Very often I find that I either didn't, or I expressed it in a lazy
Nonviolent Communication way. Now, here's how you express gratitude and a lazy
Nonviolent Communication way. You say thank you, and sometimes that's all we
need to do sometimes just saying thank you, the person can see they know what
they did, and can sense perhaps how we feel and what need was met.

There are some gratitudes that I want to be sure the person really got clear
just how much what they did enriched my life.

Then I want to find out from this what kept me from it, and I write down what
kept me from it. But then when I haven't done it, this gives me another chance.

This makes me aware. Then, if I'm going to see them again that day, gives me a
chance to express it to them in person.

If I'm already traveled to another place, I can always call them or write them a
letter, but **I want to be sure that** gratitude in my life, **gratitude that I
have for others is expressed, and** I want to make sure **that gratitude others
expressed to me is received**.

## Non-sneaky bragging

Now, I also would suggest that we build into our lives, not only space to stop
and celebrate what we can do, that we feel good about. But that we see how good
it can feel to others sometimes, **if we share with them our celebration** of
what we can do, if we do it **in what I call non sneaky bragging**.

I use that phrase after working with a friend of mine who was living in a low
income culture in San Francisco. He was a person of color, and for various
reasons, I asked him to travel with me to the Midwest of the United States to
help me in some work I was doing there.

After three days, in what was for him quite a different culture, I was curious
about what it was was like for him.

I asked him, I said, Hey, what's it like being in this culture with all these
white people and most of them college professors?

He said, *it's okay man, but what really drives me nuts, to tell you the truth,
is the sneaky bragging*.

I asked what he meant by sneaky bragging.

He said, well, like at the lunch table today. He heard this woman talk for 20
minutes giving us all these facts about how she had gotten a research proposal
funded and she was talking as though it was just interesting facts that she was
giving.

It was obvious she was trying to celebrate that she got something she worked
hard for. **Why couldn't she just come out and say how good she felt about what
she did?**

When he told me that, it just really struck me about the difference in cultures,
because when I was up at his place, where I stayed, when I was working at that
time in his region. **I noticed how when his friends came in the house, they
didn't do sneaky bragging, they came right out and celebrated** something they
had done that day, and how **they made clear how they felt** about it and **what
needs of theirs were met**. They did it in their own cultural style.

I thought, how wonderful that was that people could do that. I also thought at
that moment about a book I had read recently about research done on why
conversations are boring in middle class culture. It was for this reason that
when people really want to celebrate something they've done, they think it might
sound egotistical or self centered, to be open and honest about how good they
feel about something they've done, so they bury it behind a bunch of words that
talk about the situation, but don't really indicate how good it feels to them to
have done what they did. They don't make clear what needs of theirs were met by
doing it.

#### I was thinking of this on my way to my next training, which I was going to do at a prison

This was a prison I'd worked at before, and when I came in, the director of the
prison said, you're going to have your hands full with the group you're working
with today. There's been lots of tension on the ward, even more than usual.

Well, there usually was a lot of tension. I thought it's probably going to be
something today. Then as I got into room, I was with about 20 prisoners and
about six guards. I could see in their faces, they were all upset and just ready
to get at each other.

55:40 I said to them, before we start the workshop today, I know we got lots of
tension to deal with. But I've been thinking on the way here's something a
friend told me yesterday about what he called sneaky bragging and how people are
reluctant to express something they've done that they feel good about.

#### So before we get into all the heavy stuff today, let's go around, and I'd like each of you to tell me one thing you've done recently that you feel good about

Tell me what you did and how you feel about doing it and what need was met. This
will give us some chance to practice what we worked on in other sessions, how to
express feelings and needs only this will give us a chance to try it out with
something we've done that we feel good about, because it met a need of ours, and
then we'll get into the heavy stuff I said.

I suggested we start on my left. There sitting on my left was a gentleman who
was a prisoner, and who the previous three sessions that we had, had hadn't said
one word, he just stared at me.

Anyway, I said, So would you be willing to start? Now for the first time he said
something, and it was obvious that he had been listening in previous sessions,
because he made a clear observation to express the feeling, he said, pointing at
one of the guards across the room, **when you came in my room today to wake me
up to go to work, and I didn't cuss you out like I usually do. I feel good that
I didn't do that**.

Well, he did express and clear observation. And he did say he felt good, but he
didn't connect it to his needs.

I wondered, well, should I just leave well enough alone, but anyway, I said to
him, and what about the need?

He said, I know he wakes me up because he wants me to develop good work habits.
Just because I don't like getting up in the morning, I don't want to take it out
on him.

I like that way of expressing his self gratitude. By the time we got to two more
people, there was a whole different energy in the group, just to start by people
celebrating something they've done that met their needs and that they felt good
about.

Then when we got into the conflicts, we were able to deal with them with a whole
different energy. **Now it's not only important to do this kind of celebration
by myself, I also want to do it with the people that I'm the closest with**.
Because even there, it's very easy to get so caught up in so many things that we
don't just stop and celebrate.

For example, in many of the families that I work with, they'll stop before
eating a meal to say grace and give thanks for the food.

I asked them, Do you do the same to stop and give thanks for what people in the
family have done that is enriching your life?

Sadly most of them tell me no. I have been recommending to families that I work
with, to consider the option of taking some time every day, not out of duty
obligation have to but out of the desire to celebrate to celebrate how you can
enrich one another's lives.

My wife and I take time every morning before we go off into the world. This
opportunity to stop and express openly what the other has done that has enriched
our life to tell them as best we can, how it enriched our lives.

59:12

#### What a wonderful way to start the day

59:17 I tell people to look at their work setting, are they expressing gratitude
and receiving gratitude in their workplace.

In many of the places that I work, they just can't even imagine it. For example,
I was working in a big business in Madison, Wisconsin.

After three days of showing them how Nonviolent Communication could help them in
dealing with all the conflicts they were having within departments and between
departments, toward the end, we did a little session on gratitude.

After showing them how to express and receive gratitude in a Nonviolent
communication way.

60:00 I asked him, do you take time anytime in your meetings to express
gratitude?

A couple of the people kind of laughed, because even the thought of doing that
seems strange to them.

The director of the program said to me, Marshall, we've got so many things to
deal with each week in our meetings, that it's hard for us to figure out what to
put in the agenda. We don't have time, you know, to stop and express gratitude.

I went back a month later, to that company. Before the day began, I was sitting
in the director's office. And I asked him, I said, How are things going? Has the
training helped in dealing with the conflicts that you were having? H

e thought for a moment and said, Oh, yeah, yeah, Marshall. The trainings really
helped in dealing with those conflicts. But to tell you the truth, **you know
what really helped the most? Do you remember you suggested that we take some
time out of every meeting and express gratitude**?

I said, Yes, I remember very clearly that I suggested that, and you didn't seem
too happy with that idea.

He said, No, I wasn't, I really saw so much that had to get done. An associate
of mine, he really liked the idea. He kept bugging me. The next three days, he
would say, hey, why not? We can make time for it.

I finally said, Okay, okay. And we took 10 minutes at the beginning of our
meeting, just to give people a chance to express gratitude, before we got into
all of the hard stuff.

He said, now, Marshall, we're up to 20 minutes. We found that **when we take
that much time to stop and slow down and celebrate what's being done, how it's
enriching our lives, we find that even then when we get into the hard stuff, it
is so much more productive**.

While we're on this subject of gratitude, I would like to express my deep
gratitude that you have taken this time to hear what I've had to offer.

I've been offering you that which is very precious in my life, and it's quite a
gift that you have given me your presence to receive this.

1:02:33 I hope that these sessions have strengthened your awareness of the
preciousness of connection. It is possible for us at any time with any person. A
precious connection that I like, is described beautifully for me in the
following song

#### and the song is Revelation

```text
 I stand with you in wonder,
 and somewhere from the past
 a phrase that tells about a burning bush
 comes flashing through my mind.

 Smile if I should call you
 a flaming revelation.
 And yet that you reveal to me
 your feelings and needs honestly
 is giving of a shining sacred kind

 still before your gift of self
 for the presence you present
 hear the ancient image speak,
 stand on holy ground.

 Remembering that barefoot
 is appropriate for such a place
 I laugh with joy to cast aside
 the heavy shoes that hold them high
 and suddenly I dance with newfound grace

 You have given to me,
 so I expose the depths of self to you.
 Somehow we are one in love
 Yet both of us are free
 Touch is not to hold,
 to burn with life is not to be consumed
 reverence the mystery of human personality
 is to encounter word made flesh in me
```

______________________________________________________________________

1:05:15 This concludes the
[Nonviolent Communication Training Course with Marshall Rosenberg](https://nonviolent-communication-sfm.soundstrue.com/).
Music by Stephen McNamara. For more information on the work of Marshall
Rosenberg, please visit the worldwide web @ \<www.cnbc.org>.

If you would like to order additional copies of this audio learning series, or
to receive a complete catalogue of wisdom teachings for the inner life, please
contact [Sounds True](https://www.soundstrue.com/store/).
